To whom do I send this fresh little book
of wit, just polished off with dry pumice?
To you, Cornelius: since you were accustomed
to consider my trifles worth something
even then, when you alone of Italians
dared to explain all the ages, in three learned
works, by Jupiter, and with the greatest labour.
Then take this little book for your own: whatever
it is, and is worth: virgin Muse, patroness,
let it last, for more lives than one.
Sparrow, my sweet girl’s delight,
whom she plays with, holds to her breast,
whom, greedy, she gives her little finger to,
often provoking you to a sharp bite,
whenever my shining desire wishes
to play with something she loves,
I suppose, while strong passion abates,
it might be a small relief from her pain:
might I toy with you as she does
and ease the cares of a sad mind!
It’s as pleasing to me as, they say,
that golden apple was to the swift girl,
that loosed her belt, too long tied.
Mourn, O you Loves and Cupids
and such of you as love beauty:
my girl’s sparrow is dead,
sparrow, the girl’s delight,
whom she loved more than her eyes.
For he was sweet as honey, and knew her
as well as the girl her own mother,
he never moved from her lap,
but, hopping about here and there,
chirped to his mistress alone.
Now he goes down the shadowy road
from which they say no one returns.
Now let evil be yours, evil shadows of Orcus,
that devour everything of beauty:
you’ve stolen lovely sparrow from me.
O evil deed! O poor little sparrow!
Now, by your efforts, my girl’s eyes
are swollen and red with weeping.
This boat you see, friends, will tell you
that she was the fastest of craft,
not to be challenged for speed
by any vessel afloat, whether
driven by sail or the labour of oars.
The threatening Adriatic coast won’t deny it,
nor the isles of the Cyclades,
nor noble Rhodes, nor fearful Bosphorus,
nor the grim bay of the Black Sea
where, before becoming a boat, she was
leafy wood: for on the heights of Cytorus
she often hissed to the whispering leaves.
The boat says these things were well known to you,
and are, Amastris and box-wood clad Cytorus:
she says from the very beginning she stood
on your slope, that she dipped her oars
in your water, and carried her owner from there
over so many headstrong breakers,
whether the wind cried from starboard
or larboard, or whether Jupiter struck at the sheets
on one side and the other, together:
and no prayers to the gods of the shore were offered
for her, when she came from a foreign sea
here, as far as this limpid lake.
But that’s past: now hidden away here
she ages quietly and offers herself to you,
Castor and his brother, heavenly Twins.
Let us live, my Lesbia, let us love,
and all the words of the old, and so moral,
may they be worth less than nothing to us!
Suns may set, and suns may rise again:
but when our brief light has set,
night is one long everlasting sleep.
Give me a thousand kisses, a hundred more,
another thousand, and another hundred,
and, when we’ve counted up the many thousands,
confuse them so as not to know them all,
so that no enemy may cast an evil eye,
by knowing that there were so many kisses.
Flavius, unless your delights
were tasteless and inelegant,
you’d want to tell, and couldn’t be silent.
Surely you’re in love with some feverish
little whore: you’re ashamed to confess it.
Now, pointlessly silent, you don’t seem to be
idle of nights, it’s proclaimed by your bed
garlanded, fragrant with Syrian perfume,
squashed cushions and pillows, here and there,
and the trembling frame shaken,
quivering and wandering about.
But being silent does nothing for you.
Why? Spread thighs blab it’s not so,
if not quite what foolishness you commit.
How and whatever you’ve got, good or bad,
tell us. I want to name you and your loves
to the heavens in charming verse.
Lesbia, you ask how many kisses of yours
would be enough and more to satisfy me.
As many as the grains of Libyan sand
that lie between hot Jupiter’s oracle,
at Ammon, in resin-producing Cyrene,
and old Battiades sacred tomb:
or as many as the stars, when night is still,
gazing down on secret human desires:
as many of your kisses kissed
are enough, and more, for mad Catullus,
as can’t be counted by spies
nor an evil tongue bewitch us.
Sad Catullus, stop playing the fool,
and let what you know leads you to ruin, end.
Once, bright days shone for you,
when you came often drawn to the girl
loved as no other will be loved by you.
Then there were many pleasures with her,
that you wished, and the girl not unwilling,
truly the bright days shone for you.
And now she no longer wants you: and you
weak man, be unwilling to chase what flees,
or live in misery: be strong-minded, stand firm.
Goodbye girl, now Catullus is firm,
he doesn’t search for you, won’t ask unwillingly.
But you’ll grieve, when nobody asks.
Woe to you, wicked girl, what life’s left for you?
Who’ll submit to you now? Who’ll see your beauty?
Who now will you love? Whose will they say you’ll be?
Who will you kiss? Whose lips will you bite?
But you, Catullus, be resolved to be firm.
Veranius, first to me of all
my three hundred thousand friends,
have you come home to your own house
your harmonious brothers, and old mother?
You’re back. O happy news for me!
I’ll see you safe and sound and listen
to your tales of Spanish places that you’ve done,
and tribes, as is your custom, and
hang about your neck, and kiss
your lovely mouth and eyes.
O who of all men is happier
than I the gladdest and happiest?
Varus drags me into his affairs
out of the Forum, where I’m seen idling:
to a little whore I immediately saw,
not very inelegant, not unattractive,
who, when we came there, met us
with varied chatter, including, how might
Bithynia stand now, what’s it like, and where
might the benefit have been to me in cash.
I told her what’s true, nothing at all,
while neither the praetors nor their aides,
return any the richer, especially since
our Praetor, Memmius, the bugger,
cared not a jot for his followers.
‘But surely,’ they said, you could have bought
slaves they say are made for the litter there.’
I, so the girl might take me to be wealthy,
said ‘no, for me things weren’t so bad,
that coming across one bad province,
I couldn’t buy eight good men.’
But I’d no one, neither here nor there,
who might even raise to his shoulder
the shattered foot of an old couch.
At this she, like the shameless thing she was, said
‘I beg you, my dear Catullus, for the loan of them,
just for a while: I’d like to be carried
to Serap’s temple.’ ‘Wait’ I said to the girl,
‘what I just said was mine, isn’t actually in
my possession: my friend Cinna, that’s Gaius,
purchased the thing for himself.
Whether they’re his or mine, what difference to me?
I use them just as well as if I’d bought them myself.
But you are quite tasteless, and annoying,
you with whom no inexactness is allowed.’
Furius and Aurelius, you friends of Catullus,
whether he penetrates farthest India,
where the Eastern waves strike the shore
with deep resonance,
or among the Hyrcanians and supple Arabs,
or Sacians and Parthian bowmen,
or where the seven-mouthed Nile
colours the waters,
or whether he’ll climb the high Alps,
viewing great Caesar’s monuments,
the waters of Gallic Rhine,
and the furthest fierce Britons,
whatever the will of the heavens
brings, ready now for anything,
tell my girl this in a few
ill-omened words.
Let her live and be happy with her adulterers,
hold all three-hundred in her embrace,
truly love-less, wearing them all down
again and again: let her not look for
my love as before,
she whose crime destroyed it, like the last
flower of the field, touched once
by the passing plough.
Asinius Marrucinus, you don’t employ
your left hand too well: in wine and jest
you take neglected table-linen.
Do you think that’s witty? Get lost, you fool:
it’s such a sordid and such an unattractive thing.
Don’t you believe me? Believe Pollionus
your brother, who wishes your thefts
could be fixed by money: he’s a boy
truly stuffed with wit and humour.
So expect three hundred hendecasyllables
or return my napkin, whose value
doesn’t disturb me, truly,
it’s a remembrance of my friends.
Fabullus and Veranius sent me the gift,
napkins from Spain: they must be cherished
as my Veranius and Fabullus must be.
You’ll dine well, in a few days, with me,
if the gods are kind to you, my dear Fabullus,
and if you bring lots of good food with you,
and don’t come without a pretty girl
and wine and wit and all your laughter.
I say you’ll dine well, and charmingly,
if you bring all that: since your Catullus’s
purse alas is full of cobwebs.
But accept endearments in return for the wine
or whatever’s sweeter and finer:
since I’ll give you a perfume my girl
was given by the Loves and Cupids,
and when you’ve smelt it, you’ll ask the gods
to make you, Fabullus, all nose.
If I didn’t love you more than my eyes,
most delightful Calvus, I’d dislike you
for this gift, with a true Vatinian dislike:
Now what did I do and what did I say,
to be so badly cursed with poets?
Let the gods send ill-luck to that client
who sent you so many wretches.
But if, as I guess, Sulla the grammarian
gave you this new and inventive gift,
that’s no harm to me, it’s good and fine
that your efforts aren’t all wasted.
Great gods, an amazing, immortal book!
That you sent, of course, to your Catullus,
so he might immediately die,
on the optimum day, in the Saturnalia!
No you won’t get away with this crime.
Now when it’s light enough I’ll run
to the copyists bookstalls, I’ll acquire
Caesius, Aquinus, Suffenus,
all of the poisonous ones.
And I’ll repay you for this suffering.
Meanwhile farewell take yourself off, there,
whence your unlucky feet brought you,
cursed ones of the age, worst of poets.
I commend myself and my love to you,
Aurelius. I ask for modest indulgence,
so, if you’ve ever had a desire in your mind
you’ve pursued chastely and purely,
keep this boy of mine modestly safe,
I don’t speak to the masses – nothing to fear
from those who pass to and fro in the streets
occupied with their business –
truly the fear’s of you and your cock
dangerous to both good and bad boys.
Shake it about as you please, and with as much
force as you please, wherever you choose, outside:
I except him from that, with modesty, I think.
But if tempests of mind, and mad passion
impel you to too much sin, you wretch,
so you fill my boy’s head with deceptions,
then let misery, and evil fate, be yours!
Of him whom, with feet dragged apart, an open door,
radishes and mullets pass through.
I’ll fuck you and bugger you,
Aurelius the pathic, and sodomite Furius,
who thought you knew me from my verses,
since they’re erotic, not modest enough.
It suits the poet himself to be dutifully chaste,
his verses not necessarily so at all:
which, in short then, have wit and good taste
even if they’re erotic, not modest enough,
and as for that can incite to lust,
I don’t speak to boys, but to hairy ones
who can’t move their stiff loins.
You, who read all these thousand kisses,
you think I’m less of a man?
I’ll fuck you, and I’ll bugger you.
O Cologna, who want a long bridge to sport on,
and are ready to dance, though you fear
the useless bridge-props with their
much-patched standing timber,
lest they tumble and lie in deep mud:
let a good bridge be made for you as you desire
where even leap-frogging priests are safe: but
Cologna, give me that greatest gift, a good laugh.
I want a fellow-citizen of mine to go head over heels
straight into the deep mire from your bridge,
since truly the whole pool and the putrid marsh
is the blackest and deepest of chasms.
The man’s totally dull, knows no more than
a two-year-old child, asleep in its father’s trembling arms.
Who, though he’s married a girl in her first flowering,
a girl more delicate than a pretty little kid,
needing to be tended more carefully than choicest grapes,
let’s her play as she wishes, doesn’t care a fig,
hasn’t risen to the occasion, but like an alder
in a Ligurian ditch, crippled by the axe,
feels as much of it all as if there were no woman there:
Such is his stupor he doesn’t see, or hear me, he,
who doesn’t know who he is, or whether he is or not.
Now I want to toss him headlong from your bridge,
if it’s possible suddenly to raise that stupefied dullness,
and abandon that indolent mind in the heavy bog,
as mules cast shoes into tenacious depths.
Note: Nos: 18-20 are considered spurious and are omitted here.
Aurelius, father of hungers,
you desire to fuck,
not just these, but whoever my friends
were, or are, or will be in future years.
not secretly: now at the same time as you joke
with one, you try clinging to him on every side.
In vain: now my insidious cock
will bugger you first.
And, if you’re filled, I’ll say nothing:
Now I’m grieving for him: you teach
my boy, mine, to hunger and thirst.
So lay off: while you’ve any shame,
or you will end up being buggered.
Varus, that Suffenus, thoroughly known to us,
is a man who’s charming, witty, urbane,
and the same man for ages has penned many verses.
I think he’s written a thousand, ten thousand, or more,
not those that are done on cheap manuscript
paper: but princely papyri, new books,
new roller ends, new red ties for the parchment,
lead-ruled and smoothed all-over with pumice.
When you read them, that lovely urbane Suffenus
turns into a goat-herd or a ditch-digger:
he’s so altered and strange.
What should we think of it? He who might just now
have been playing the fool, being witty with the thing,
the same man’s crude, crude as a bumpkin,
he mentions his poems as well, nor is there ever
likewise anything as happy as the poems he writes:
he delights in himself so, is so amazed by himself.
Of course we’re all deceived in the same way, and
there’s no one who can’t somehow or other be seen
as a Suffenus. Whoever it is, is subject to error:
we don’t see the pack on our own back.
Furius, you who’ve neither slaves nor cash
nor beetles nor spiders nor fire,
truly have a father and step-mother,
whose teeth can chew like flints:
that’s fine for you, and your father
and your father’s wooden wife.
No wonder: since you’re all well,
good digestion, nothing to fear,
no flames, no weighty disasters,
no wicked deeds, no threat of poison,
no chance of further dangers.
And you’ve a body drier than bone
or whatever is most desiccated
by heat and cold and hunger.
Why wouldn’t you be well and happy?
You’ve no sweat, no phlegm,
or mucus, or evil cold in the head.
To this cleanliness add more cleanliness,
your arse is purer than a little salt-cellar,
and doesn’t crap ten times in a year:
and your shit’s harder than beans or pebbles.
So if you rub it and crush it between your fingers,
you can’t stain a single finger:
it all suits you so happily Furius,
don’t despise it, or consider it nothing,
and cease to beg for that hundred sestertia
you always ask for: sufficiency is riches.
Iuventius, who are our pride,
not just now, for all times that have been,
or will be hereafter in later years,
rather surrender Midas’s riches
to him, who has no slaves or cash,
than allow yourself to be loved by him.
‘Why, isn’t he a decent man?’ you ask. He is:
but this decent man has no slaves or cash.
Ignore it: disparage it as you may:
he still has no slaves and no money.
Thallus the sodomite, softer than rabbit’s fur
or goose grease, or the little tip of the ear,
or an old man’s slack penis mouldy with spider-webs,
and that same Thallus more rapacious than a wild storm,
when the sea-goddess reveals the yawning breakwaters,
return my cloak, you pounced on,
and Spanish napkin, and Bithynian painted ware,
absurd man, that you ‘own’ openly like heirlooms.
Now, unglue them from your talons, and return them,
lest those soft little flanks and tender fingers
are shamefully written over with the mark of the lash,
and you toss immoderately, like a paltry boat
caught in a heavy sea, in a raging wind.
Furius, your little villa’s not exposed
to the southerlies, or the westerlies,
the savage north-wind, or the easterly breeze,
but truly to fifteen thousand two hundred cash.
O terrifying and destructive wind!
Serving-boy fill for me stronger cups
of old Falernian, since Postumia,
the mistress’s, laws demand it,
she who’s juicier then the juicy grape.
But you water, fatal to wine, away with you:
far off, wherever, be off to the strict.
This wine is Bacchus’s own.
Followers of Piso, needy retinue,
with suitable and ready packs,
Veranius, the best, and you, my Fabullus,
what possessions do you carry? Haven’t you borne
hunger and cold enough with that good-for-nothing?
Do any small gains show in the expense accounts,
considering that I, following my praetor,
repay what was spent, with small gain?
O Memmius, truly, and daily, slowly
buggered me backwards with that whole tree of his.
But, as far as I can see, your case is the same:
now you’re stuffed by no less a circumcised cock.
Seek out the noble ones, my friends!
But, to you, may the gods and goddesses bring
much evil luck, disgraces to Romulus and Remus.
Who could see it, who could endure it,
unless he were shameless, greedy, a gambler?
Mamurra owns riches that Transalpine Gaul
and furthest Britain once owned.
Roman sodomite, do you see this and bear it?
And now shall the man, arrogant, overbearing,
flit through all of the beds
like a whitish dove or an Adonis?
Roman sodomite, do you see this and bear it?
You’re shameless, greedy, a gambler.
Surely it wasn’t for this, you, the unique leader,
were in the furthest western isle,
so that this loose-living tool of yours
might squander two or three hundred times its worth?
What is it but perverted generosity?
Hasn’t he squandered enough, or been elevated enough?
First his inheritance was well and truly spent,
then the booty from Pontus, then
Spain’s, to make three, as the gold-bearing Tagus knows:
now be afraid for Gaul’s and Britain’s.
Why cherish this evil? What’s he good for
but to devour his rich patrimony?
Was it for this, the city’s wealthiest,
you, father-in law, son-in-law, wasted a world?
Alfenus, negligent, false to the concord of pals,
have you no sympathy now with your gentle friend?
The impious deeds of deceitful men don’t please the gods.
You neglect me and abandon me to miserable illness.
Ah, say, what should men do, in whom should they trust?
Surely you, unjustly, commanded my trust, seduced
me to love, as if it were all quite safe for me.
Now you withdraw, and all your vain actions and words
you let slip on the winds, with the airy clouds.
If you forget, the gods will remember, Faith remembers,
so that whatever you do, you’ll soon repent of your deeds.
Sirmio, jewel of islands, jewel of peninsulas,
jewel of whatever is set in the bright waters
or the great sea, or either ocean,
with what joy, what pleasure I gaze at you,
scarcely believing myself free of Thynia
and the Bithynian fields, seeing you in safety.
O what freedom from care is more joyful
than when the mind lays down its burden,
and weary, back home from foreign toil,
we rest in the bed we longed for?
This one moment’s worth all the labour.
Hail, O lovely Sirmio, and rejoice as I rejoice,
and you, O lake of Lydian waters, laugh
with whatever of laughter lives here.
Please, my sweet Ipsíthilla,
my delight, my charmer:
tell me to come to you at siesta.
And if you tell me, help it along,
let no-one cover the sign at your threshold,
nor you choose to step out of doors,
but stay at home, and get ready
for nine fucks, in succession, with me.
Truly, if you should want it, let me know now:
because lying here, fed, and indolently full,
I’m making a hole in my tunic and cloak.
O first of the bath-house thieves
Vibennius the father, with sodomite son
(since the father’s right hand is dirtier,
and the son’s arse more all-consuming),
why not go into exile, to some vile place?
Seeing the father’s pillage is known
to us all, and the son’s hairy arse,
you can’t sell for a farthing.
Under Diana’s protection,
we pure girls, and boys:
we pure boys, and girls,
we sing of Diana.
O, daughter of Latona,
greatest child of great Jove,
whose mother gave birth
near the Delian olive,
mistress of mountains
and the green groves,
the secret glades,
and the sounding streams:
you, called Juno Lucina
in childbirth’s pains,
you, called all-powerful Trivia,
and Luna, of counterfeit daylight.
Your monthly passage
measures the course of the year,
you fill the rustic farmer’s
roof with good crops.
Take whatever sacred name
pleases you, be a sweet help
to the people of Rome,
as you have been of old.
Paper, I’d like you to say to Caecilius,
that tender poet, that friend of mine,
leave Lake Como, come now to Verona,
abandon the town there and the shore.
Because there are certain thoughts that I want
him to hear of, from his friend and yours.
So, if he’s wise, he’ll eat up the road,
though some lovely girl calls to him
asks his return, clasping both hands
round his neck, and begging delay.
Who, if the truth’s been told me now
love’s him with violent desire.
For, since the moment she read his unfinished
Lady of Dindymus, the poor little thing
has been eaten by fire to the core of her bones.
I forgive you, girl, more learned
than the Sapphic Muse: it’s truly lovely,
Caecilius’s unfinished Great Mother Cybele.
Annals, of Volusius, papyrus droppings,
discharge my girl’s votive offering.
Since, by sacred Venus and Cupid, she promised,
that if I were given back to her,
and I left off launching wild iambics,
she’d offer the gods the choicest words,
of the worst of limping poets,
consumed with malignant wood.
And the girl thought this was the worst,
with charming laughter, to move the gods.
Now O goddess created from the blue sea,
whose is holy Idalia, Urii, Ancona,
reed-bound Cnidos, and Amathusia,
Golgos, and Adriatic Dyrrachium,
make the vow acceptable, fulfilled,
if its not lacking in wit and charm.
But meanwhile, you, enter the fire,
you, full of boorishness and crudities,
Volusian annals, papyrus droppings.
Lecherous tavern, and you its regulars,
nine pillars along from the Twins’ pillars,
do you think you’re the only ones with cocks,
the only ones who’re allowed to trouble
young girls, and consider the rest of us goats?
Or, because a hundred or two of you sit in a row, you,
dullards, that I daren’t bugger two hundred together?
Think on: I’ll draw all over the front
of the tavern with your leavings.
Because my girl, who’s left my arms,
whom I loved as no other girl’s ever been loved,
for whom so many great battles were fought,
is there. You, all the rich and the fortunate, love her,
and, what’s so shameful, it’s true, all the lesser ones,
all the adulterous frequenters of by-ways:
you, above all, one of the hairy ones,
rabbit-faced offspring of Spain,
Egnatius. Whom a shadowy beard improves,
and teeth scrubbed with Iberian piss.
He’s ill, Cornificius, your Catullus,
he’s ill, by Hercules, and it’s bad,
and worse and worse by the hour.
Where are you, for whom it’s the least and easiest thing,
to bring consolation with chatter?
I’m cross with you. So much for my friendship?
Even a little might comfort me,
sadder than Simonides’s tears.
Egnatius, because he has snow-white teeth,
smiles all the time. If you’re a defendant
in court, when the counsel draws tears,
he smiles: if you’re in grief at the pyre
of pious sons, the lone lorn mother weeping,
he smiles. Whatever it is, wherever it is,
whatever he’s doing, he smiles: he’s got a disease,
neither polite, I would say, nor charming.
So a reminder to you, from me, good Egnatius.
If you were a Sabine or Tiburtine
or a fat Umbrian, or plump Etruscan,
or dark toothy Lanuvian, or from north of the Po,
and I’ll mention my own Veronese too,
or whoever else clean their teeth religiously,
I’d still not want you to smile all the time:
there’s nothing more foolish than foolishly smiling.
Now you’re Spanish: in the country of Spain
what each man pisses, he’s used to brushing
his teeth and red gums with, every morning,
so the fact that your teeth are so polished
just shows you’re the more full of piss.
What illness of mind, poor little Ravidus,
drives you headlong onto my iambics?
What god, badly-disposed towards you,
intends to start a mad quarrel?
Or is it to achieve vulgar fame?
Why the assault? You want to be known everywhere?
You will be, seeing you’ve wanted to love
my love, and with a long punishment.
Ameana, a girl fucked by all,
requires ten thousand from me,
that girl with the ugly great nose,
bankrupt Formianus’s ‘friend’.
Gather round, you who care for the girl,
assemble together, doctors and friends:
the girl’s not well, don’t ask what it is:
she’s suffering from fantasy money.
Come, hendecasyllables, all that there are
and from every side, as many as are.
A base adulteress thinks I’m a joke,
and refuses to give me my tablets
once more, if you’d believe it.
We’ll follow her: ask for them back.
Which one, you may ask? The one you can see
strutting disgracefully, laughing ridiculously,
maddening, with the jaws of a Gaulish bitch.
Surround her: ask for them back:
‘Stinking adulteress, give back my letters,
give back, stinking adulteress, my letters!’
You won’t? O to the mire, the brothel,
or if anything can be more ruinous, then that!
But still don’t think that’s enough.
Call her again in a louder voice:
‘Stinking adulteress, give back my letters,
give back, stinking adulteress, my letters!’
But it’s no use: nothing disturbs her.
We’d better change methods and tactics,
if we want them to be of more use to us:
let’s see if we can’t get a blush
from that bitch’s brazen face.:
‘Honest and chaste one, give back my letters.’
Greetings, girl with a nose not the shortest,
feet not so lovely, eyes not of the darkest,
fingers not slender, mouth never healed,
and a not excessively charming tongue,
bankrupt Formianus’s ‘little friend’.
And the Province pronounces you beautiful?
To be compared to my Lesbia?
O witless and ignorant age!
O my estate, whether you’re Sabine or Tiburtine
(for they call you Tiburtine, who don’t wish to wound
Catullus: but those who wish to do so say
that whatever the bet is you’re Sabine),
but whether you’re Sabine or Tiburtine,
I willingly inhabit your suburban villa,
and shake off a bad bronchial cough,
given me by a stomach chill, my own fault,
while stuffing extravagant dinners.
For I wanted to be a guest of Sestius,
so I read the oration in Antius’s case,
full of legal poison and pestilence,
it weakened me even to the extent
of watery colds and frequent coughing,
till I fled to your bosom, and restored
my health, with rest and nettle-soup.
Refreshed by which, I give you great thanks,
who take no revenge on me for my error.
Now I don’t care, if I take up that heinous
script again, if it’s not me but Sestius himself,
wheezing and coughing, who takes a chill,
who invited me only after I’d read that vile work.
Septimius holding his beloved Acme
in his lap, said: ‘Acme, mine, if I
don’t love you desperately, and love forever,
continually through all the years,
as much as he who loves the most,
in empty Libya and scorched India,
I’ll fight against some green-eyed lion.’
As he spoke, Love, to left and right,
sneezed his approbation.
But Acme lifted her head slightly
and her charming red lips spoke
to her sweet boy’s intoxicated eyes:
‘So, Septimius, mea vita,
let us always serve this one lord,
that more deeply and more fiercely
the fire will burn my tender marrow.’
As she spoke, Love, to left and right
sneezed his approbation.
Now profiting from these good omens
their mutual spirits love and are loved.
Septimius sets his little Acme,
above the Syrians or Britons:
faithful Acme makes Septimius
her one darling and desire.
Who might see more blessed creatures
who a love more fortunate?
Now Spring returns mild and temperate,
now the wild equinoctial skies
are calmed by Zephyr’s happier breezes.
The fields of Phrygia will be forsaken,
Catullus, rich farms of hot Nicaea:
we’ll flee to Asia’s bright cities.
Now restless minds long for travel,
now the glad feet stir with pleasure.
O sweet crowd of friends farewell,
who came together from far places,
whom divergent roads must carry.
Porcius and Socration, two left hands
of Piso, the world’s itches and famines,
that circumcised Priapus prefers you
to my Veraniolus and my Fabullus?
You, indulged with great sumptuous banquets
every day: my friends
looking for work at the crossroads?
Iuventius, if I were always allowed
to kiss your honey-sweet eyes,
I might kiss you three hundred
thousand times, and never be sated,
not even if my kisses were more
than the crop’s ripe ears of wheat.
Most fluent of Romulus’s descendants,
that are, that have been, that will be
through all the years, Marcus Tullius,
Catullus sends you the warmest thanks,
the least of all the poets, as much
the least of all the poets, as you
are the greatest of all lawyers.
Yesterday, Calvus, idle day
we played with my writing tablets,
harmonising in being delightful:
scribbling verses, each of us
playing with metres, this and that,
reciting together, through laughter and wine.
And I left there fired with your charm,
Calvus, and with your wit,
so that, restless, I couldn’t enjoy food,
or close my eyes quietly in sleep,
but tossed the whole bed about wildly
in passion, longing to see the light,
so I might speak to you, and be with you.
But afterwards I lay there wearied
with effort, half-dead in the bed,
I made this poem for you, pleasantly,
from which you might gather my pain.
Now beware of being rash, don’t reject
my prayers I beg, my darling,
lest Nemesis demand your punishment. She’s
a powerful goddess. Beware of annoying her.
He seems equal to the gods, to me, that man,
if it’s possible more than just divine,
who sitting over against you, endlessly
sees you and hears you
laughing so sweetly, that with fierce pain I’m robbed
of all of my senses: because that moment
I see you, Lesbia, nothing’s left of me.....
but my tongue is numbed, and through my poor limbs
fires are raging, the echo of your voice
rings in both ears, my eyes are covered
with the dark of night.
‘Your idleness is loathsome Catullus:
you delight in idleness, and too much posturing:
idleness ruined the kings and the cities
of former times.’
Why, Catullus? Why wait to die?
Nonnius the tumour sits in a Magistrate’s chair,
Vatinius perjures himself for a Consulate:
Why, Catullus? Why wait to die?
I laughed when someone, from the crowd,
while my Calvus explained the Vatinian case
quite wonderfully, said admiringly, raising his hands:
‘Great gods, what an eloquent little man!’
Otho’s head is quite tiny,
and it’s owner’s legs loutishly unclean,
soft and delicate is Libo’s farting:
if not with all that, then let me displease you
with Sufficio, old age renewed...
again let my worthless iambics
rile you, our one and only general.
I beg you, if it’s not too much trouble,
point out where your shade might be.
You, little Camerius, I’ve looked for you,
you, in the Circus, you, in the bookshops,
you, in the sacred shrine of great Jove.
I’ve detained all the girls together
in Pompey’s Arcade, my friend,
whose faces were blank, however.
‘Worst of girls, reveal my Camerius’,
so I demanded of them.
One replied, revealing her nudity...
‘Look he’s hiding in these rosy breasts.’
But, oh it’s a labour of Hercules to bear with you:
as much as your pride denies it, my friend.
Since I’m not that bronze guardian of Crete,
not Ladas or wing-footed Perseus,
since I’m not carried by Pegasus in flight,
nor by Rhesus’s swift snowy-white team,
add to that feathered-feet and swiftness
and the collective speed of the winds,
Camerius you might have said who you were with:
but I’d be weary right down to my marrow
and devoured by excessive fatigue
if I went on searching for you, my friend.
Tell us where you’ll be in future, utter
boldly, commit yourself, trust to the light.
Do the milk-white girls hold you now?
If your tongue’s stuck in your mouth,
you’ll banish all the rewards of love.
Venus delights in copious language.
Or, if you want, fasten your lips,
while letting me share in your loves.
O Cato, an amusing ridiculous thing,
worth your ears and your laughter!
Cato laugh as you love Catullus:
the thing is amusing, and quite ridiculous.
I caught my girl’s little pupil thrusting away:
if only to please Dione, I sacrificed him
to my rigid succeeding shaft.
Beautifully matched the perverse buggers,
Mamurra the catamite and Caesar.
No wonder: both equally spotted,
one from Formia, the other the City,
marks that remain, not to be lessened.
diseased the same, both of these twins,
both somewhat skilled in the selfsame couch,
this one no greedier an adulterer than that,
rivals in shared little girls.
Beautifully matched the perverse buggers.
Caelius, our Lesbia, that Lesbia,
that Lesbia, Catullus alone loved
more than himself, and all of his own,
now at crossroads, and down alleyways,
jerks off the brave sons of Rome.
Rufa from Bologna gives head to Rufulus,
she’s Menenius’s wife, whom you’ve often seen,
snatching food, from the pyre itself, in the cemetery,
chasing the bread when it rolls from the flames,
being thumped by the half-shaven cremator.
You now, did a lioness, from African mountains,
or the depths of howling Scylla’s thighs,
create you as hard and as foul as that,
so you might show scorn for the voice of entreaty,
in its latest misfortune, out of that oh too cruel heart?
You, who live on Helicon’s
hills, the son of Urania,
who carry the tender virgin
to her man, O Hymanaee Hymen,
O Hymen Hymenaee:
crown your brow with sweet flowers
of marjoram fragrance,
put on the glad veil, here,
come, wearing the saffron shoes
on your snow-white feet:
summoned to the happy day
singing the nuptial songs
with ringing voice,
strike your feet on the ground, shake
the pine torch in your hand.
Now Vinia comes to her Manlius,
as Venus, adorning Mount Ida,
came to Paris, her Phrygian judge,
a rare girl wedded to rare fortune,
like the myrtle of Asia born
on the flowering branches,
that the divine Hamadryads
playfully tend themselves
with shining dew.
So come, suffer yourself to approach,
leave the Aonian cave among
the cliffs of Thespia,
leave the nymph Aganippe
and her cooling stream.
And call the bride to her
new husband’s loving home,
her heart bound fast with love,
as the clinging ivy enfolds the tree,
winding here and there.
And you chaste virgins too,
whose own day will come,
singing harmoniously
cry, O Hymanaee Hymen,
O Hymen Hymenaee.
That, hearing himself called
to perform his service, he may
suffer himself to approach,
the commander of wedding joys,
the true uniter-in-love.
What greater god do you love
sought out by lovers?
What divine one do men
worship more, O Hymanaee Hymen,
O Hymen Hymenaee?
You her trembling father
invokes: for you
the virgin belt’s untied:
for you the bridegroom waits,
fearful with new desire.
You give the young girl fresh
from her mother’s breast,
to the young novice’s
hands, O Hymanaee Hymen,
O Hymen Hymenaee.
Venus can take no advantage
of what good custom allows,
without you, but she can
if you’re willing. What god dare
compare with you in this?
No house bears offspring
without you, no parent can be
brightened by children: but they can
if you’re willing. What god dare
compare with you in this?
No ruler can set the boundaries
to his country: but he can
if you’re willing. What god dare
compare with you in this?
Open the lock of the door.
The virgin comes. Do you see how
the torches scatter brilliant sparks?
Noble shame holds back.
However obedient she is,
she weeps that she has to go.
Don’t weep. There’s no danger
to you Aurunculeia,
nor will bright day see
a lovelier girl than you
rise from the Ocean waves.
Such a hyacinth flower
as blooms in a rich man’s
colourful little garden.
But you linger: the day vanishes.
Let the new bride appear.
Let the new bride appear, so
she can now be viewed, and listen
to my words. See? The torches
scatter golden sparks:
let the new bride appear.
Your husband’s not fickle,
given to sinful adulteries,
chasing shameful vices,
does not wish to flee from
sleep in your tender breasts,
and as the vines slowly wind
about the trees they claim,
he’ll be wound in your
embrace. But the day vanishes:
let the new bride appear.
O bridal-bed, that for all
at the foot of the shining couch,
comes to your master,
what joy, what wandering
night, what noon
delights! But the day goes by:
let the new bride appear.
O, you boys, lift the torches:
I see the flame approach.
Come: let the song sound in harmony
‘io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.’
Don’t hold back the bold
Fescennine laughter,
don’t let this obedient concubine
abandoning his master’s love
deny the boys their nuts.
Give nuts to the boys, you idle
concubine! You’ve toyed
with the nuts long enough:
now be pleased to serve Hymen.
Concubine, give them nuts.
Girls seemed vile to you,
concubine, yesterday, till today:
now the hair-curler smooths
your beard. Wretch of a wretch,
concubine, give them nuts.
You’ll speak ill of abstaining
from your slaves, perfumed
husband, but abstain.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
We know what’s allowed to you
when you’re known to be single,
but married it’s not allowed.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
Bride, beware you don’t deny
what your man comes seeking,
lest he goes seeking elsewhere.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
Powerful in your house,
and happy in your powers,
that act without you there,
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee,
until with trembling motion
white-haired old age
nods at all and everything.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
In your saffron shoes cross
the threshold with good omens,
and enter the shining door.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
Look inside where your man
lies on a Tyrian bed
waiting for you alone.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
He no less than you
burns with fire in his heart,
but inwardly much greater.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
Page, let go the young
girl’s shapely arm: now
she reaches her husband’s bed.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
You good wives who know
the powers of old to bring
young girls to marriage.
Io Hymen Hymenaee io,
io Hymen Hymenaee.
Now bridegroom, you may come:
your wife waits in your bed,
her lovely face gleaming,
like a white poppy,
on a saffron field.
But, husband, let the gods
joy, you are no less
handsome, nor does Venus
neglect you. But the daylight flies:
come now, don’t delay.
He’s not lingered:
now he comes. Kind Venus
shall aid you, since you desire
openly what you desire, you
won’t forget kind love.
He who would count your joys,
many thousands, must first
tally the grains of Africa’s sands,
and the glittering stars.
Play as you wish, and quickly
give her children. It’s not right
for an ancient name to be
childless, but it should create
from the same root.
I want a young Torquatus
to stretch out his tender hand
from his mother’s lap
sweetly smiling to his father
from half-open lips.
Let him be like his father
Manlius, let that be known
by all the unknowing,
and let his face reveal,
his mother’s faithfulness.
So our praise approves
one born of a noble mother,
just as unparalleled fame echoes
from Penelope, the mother
of excellent Telemachus.
Close the doorways, virgins:
we’re satisfied with our play. But you
brave partners live truly, and
do your duty constantly,
with vigour and with joy.
Evening is here, young men, arise: evening, awaited
so long by the heavens, barely still shows the light.
Now is the time to rise, to leave the rich banquet,
now the virgin comes, now the wedding-song is sung.
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
Do you see the unmarried girls, you young men?
Rise to meet them: the evening star shows Thessalian fire.
Such is the contest: see how they spring up so nimbly?
Don’t fear to rise, they sing to win a partner.
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
The palm’s not easily won by us men as equals:
consider, the girls need to prepare amongst themselves.
not a vain preparation: they truly know what’s what:
no wonder, since they concentrate their whole mind.
Our minds are elsewhere: our ears turn elsewhere:
so we’ll be defeated by willpower: victory needs attention.
Therefore turn your minds to it at the least:
now they begin to sing, now you must reply.
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
Hesperus what fire, they say, is crueller than yours?
Who can tear a daughter away from her mother’s arms,
from a mother’s detaining arms tear a daughter away,
and give a virgin girl to an ardent young man.
What do the enemy do that’s crueller, in capturing a city?
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
Hesperus, who shines with happier fire in the sky?
You who strengthen the bond of marriage with your flame,
with what men swear, swearing it to the parents,
not to be joined together before your own brightness rises.
What wished-for hour by the gods is more happily granted?
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
Hesperus has stolen one like us away.
And now at your rising the watchman always wakes,
thieves hide by night, who often likewise return,
Hesperus, you catch them, as your name alters, at dawn,
but the girls love to slander you with false complaints.
Why do they complain, if they secretly wish it then?
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
As the hidden flower born in the hedged garden
unknown to the beasts, untouched by the plough,
that the breezes sweeten, the sun strengthens, the rain feeds:
that many young men would choose, and many young girls:
when that same flower fades, plucked by a tender hand,
no young boy would choose it, and no young girl:
so the virgin, while she’s untouched, while she’s their love:
if she loses her flower of chastity, her body dishonoured,
she’s no longer the boy’s delight, the girls’ beloved.
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
As the vine we see, grown in the open field,
never lifting its head, never bearing sweet grapes,
its delicate stem bending downwards with the weight,
so that in a moment its tallest shoot will touch its roots:
no countryman, no farm-hand will cherish it:
but if the same plant is fastened tight, wedded to an elm,
many countrymen and farm-hands will cherish it.
So a virgin who stays untouched, and uncultivated, ages:
while taken in equal marriage, while the time is ripe,
she’s loved more by the man, less hateful to her parents.
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
And don’t you struggle with such a husband, girl.
it’s not right to struggle, you, whose father gives you away,
your father and your mother, who prepare you.
Your virginity’s not wholly yours: part is your parents:
a third your father’s, a third your mother’s,
only a third is yours: don’t fight those two,
who grant their rights to the son-in-law with the dowry.
Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen be near, O Hymenaee!
As soon as Attis, borne over the deep seas in a swift boat,
had reached the Phrygian woods, with rapid eager steps,
had returned to a dark corner of the goddess’s grove,
goaded by mad fury, and there, his wits wandering
had sliced off his testicles with a sharp stone,
and had seen his remaining members devoid of power,
and that country’s soil spotted with fresh blood,
he took up the drum lightly in his pale hands,
your drum, Cybele, yours, Great Mother, in your rite,
and striking the sounding bull’s-hide with delicate fingers,
chanted to his followers, as it quivered from his assault:
‘Gallae, come, rise, to the high woods of Cybele, now,
come, now, wandering cattle of Dindymus’s Lady,
like exiles wandering here on an alien shore,
followers of my way, lead by me, my friends,
you suffered the swift seas and the wild waves
and sheared your sex from your bodies with great hatred:
gladden the Lady’s spirit with swift movements.
Banish dull delay from your minds: come, now, follow,
to Phrygian Cybele’s house, the Phrygian goddess’s grove,
where the voice of the cymbal clashes, the drum echoes,
where the Phrygian flute-player plays on a curving reed,
where the ivy-crowned Maenads violently toss their heads,
where they act out the sacred rites with high-pitched howls,
where the goddess’s wandering retinue’s wont to hover,
where we should hurry with our swift triple-step.’
As Attis, the counterfeit woman, sings this to his friends,
the Bacchic choir suddenly cries with quivering tongues,
the drum echoes it gently, the hollow cymbals ring.
The swift choir comes to green Ida on hurrying feet.
Attis, leading, panting wildly, goading his scattered wits,
enters the dark grove accompanied by the drum,
like a wild heifer escaping the weight of the yoke:
The agile Gallae follow their swift-footed leader.
Then, since wearied, foodless, they reach Cybele’s grove,
they’re seized by sleep from their excessive labours.
Dull tiredness overwhelms eyes giving way to languor:
mad frenzy vanishes in the calm of gentle breath.
But when the Sun from his golden face scanned the bright
heavens with radiant eye, the harsh earth, and wild sea,
and dispelled the shadows of night with his lively steeds,
then the Grace, Pasithea, takes swift Sleep, flying
from the waking Attis, to her beating heart.
So, rapidly, from sweet dream and free of madness,
Attis recollected his actions in his thoughts,
and saw with a clear heart what and where he had been,
turning again with passionate mind to the sea.
There gazing at the wide waters with tearful eyes
he raised his voice and sadly bemoaned his homeland:
‘Land that fathered me, land that mothered me,
I, who left you so sadly, have reached the groves of Ida,
like a slave fleeing his master, so am I among
snows, and the frozen lairs of wild creatures,
and should I in madness enter one of their dens
where would I think to find you buried in those places?
The keen eye itself desires to turn itself towards you,
while my thought is free a while of the wild creatures.
Have I been brought from my distant home for this grove?
Shall I lose country, possessions, friends, kin?
Shall I lose forum, wrestling ring, stadium and gymnasium?
Sorrow on sorrow, again and again complaint in the heart.
What form have I not been, what have I not performed?
I a woman, I a young man, a youth, a boy,
I the flower of the athletes, the glory of the wrestling ring:
my doorway frequented, my threshold warm,
my house was garlanded with wreaths of flowers,
at the dawn separation from my bed.
Now am I brought here priest and slave of divine Cybele?
I, to be Maenad: a part of myself: a sterile man?
I to worship on green Ida in a place cloaked in frozen snow?
I to live my life beneath the high summits of Phrygia,
where deer haunt the woods, where the wild boar roams?
Now I grieve for what I did, now I repent.’
As the swift sounds leave his rosy lips
the fresh words reach the twin ears of the goddess,
as Cybele is loosing the lions from their yoke
and goading the left-hand beast: she spoke to it,
saying: ‘Go now, be fierce, so you make him mad, so he
is forced to return to the grove by the pain of his madness,
he who desires to escape my rule so freely.
Let your tail wound your back, let the lashes show,
make the whole place echo to your bellowing roar,
shake your red mane fiercely over your taut neck.’
So Cybele spoke in threat and loosed the leash.
The wild beast urging itself to speed, roused in spirit,
tore away, roared, broke madly through the thickets.
and when it reached the wet margin of the white sands,
and saw delicate Attis near to the ocean waves,
it charged. He fled demented to the wild wood:
there to be ever enslaved, for the rest of his life.
Goddess, Great Goddess, Cybele, Lady of Dindymus,
Mistress, let all your anger be far from my house:
make others aroused, make other men raving mad.
Once they say pine-trees born on the heights of Pelion
floated through Neptune’s clear waves,
to the River Phasis and Aeetes’s borders,
with chosen men, oaks of the Argive people,
hoping to steal the Golden Fleece of Colchis
daring to course the salt deeps in their swift ship,
sweeping the blue waters with fir-wood oars.
The goddess herself who guards the heights of the city,
who joined the curving fabric to pinewood keel,
made their ship speed onwards with light winds.
That vessel was first to explore the unknown sea:
so, as she ploughed the windblown waters with her prow,
and whitened the churning waves with foam from the oars,
the Nereids lifted themselves from the dazzling white
depths of the sea, amazed at this wonder of ocean.
In those, and other days, mortal eyes saw the sea-nymphs
raise themselves, bodies all naked, as far as their nipples,
from the white depths.
Then Peleus, they say, was inflamed with love of Thetis,
then Thetis did not despise marriage with a mortal,
then Jupiter himself agreed to Thetis’s marriage.
O heroes, born in a chosen age, hail, godlike race!
O offspring of a blessed mother, hail once more.
Often I’ll address you, in my song.
And I address you, so blessed in your fortunate marriage,
chief of Pelian Thessaly, to whom Jupiter himself
creator of gods, yielded his beloved:
did not Thetis possess you, loveliest of Nereids?
Did not Tethys allow you to lead off her grand-daughter,
and Oceanus, who embraces the whole world with sea?
When at the time appointed the longed-for flames arise,
all of Thessaly crowds together to the palace,
the halls are filled with a joyful assembly:
they bring gifts with them, declaring their joy in their looks.
Cieros is deserted: they leave Pthiotic Tempe,
Crannon’s houses, and Larissa’s walls,
they gather in Pharsalia, crowd under Pharsalia’s roofs.
No one farms the fields, the necks of bullocks soften,
nor does the curved hoe clear beneath the vines,
nor does the ox drag earth outward with the blade,
nor does the sickle thin the shade of leafy trees,
coarse rust attacks the neglected plough.
But the palace gleams bright with gold and silver
through all the rich receding halls.
The ivory chairs shine, cups glisten on tables,
the whole palace gladdened with splendour of royal wealth.
In the midst of the palace a sacred couch, truly joyful
for the marriage of the goddess, gleaming with Indian ivory,
stained with the red dyes won from purple murex.
The cloth depicts in ancient forms, with marvellous art,
in all their variety, the excellence of gods and men.
Here are seen the wave-echoing shores of Naxos,
Theseus, aboard his ship, vanishing swiftly, watched
by Ariadne, ungovernable passion in her heart,
not yet believing that she sees what she does see,
still only just awoken from deceptive sleep,
finding herself abandoned wretchedly to empty sands.
But uncaring the hero fleeing strikes the deep with his oars,
casting his vain promises to the stormy winds.
The Minoan girl goes on gazing at the distance,
with mournful eyes, like the statue of a Bacchante,
gazes, alas, and swells with great waves of sorrow,
no longer does the fine turban remain on her golden hair,
no longer is she hidden by her lightly-concealing dress,
no longer does the shapely band hold her milk-white breasts
all of it scattered, slipping entirely from her body,
plays about her feet in the salt flood.
But, not caring now for turban or flowing dress, the lost girl
gazed towards you, Theseus, with all her heart, spirit, mind.
Wretched thing, for whom bright Venus reserved the thorny
cares of constant mourning in your heart,
from that time when it suited warlike Theseus,
leaving the curving shores of Piraeus,
to reach the Cretan regions of the unbending king.
For then forced by cruel plague, they say,
as punishment, to absolve the murder of Androgeos
ten chosen young men of Athens and ten unmarried girls
used to be given together as sacrifice to the Minotaur.
With which evil the narrow walls were troubled until
Theseus chose to offer himself for his dear Athens
rather than such Athenian dead be carried un-dead to Crete.
And so in a swift ship and with gentle breezes
he came to great Minos and his proud halls.
As soon as the royal girl cast her eye on him with desire,
she whom the chaste bed nourished, breathing
sweet perfumes in her mother’s gentle embrace,
even as Eurotas’s streams surround a myrtle
that sheds its varied colours on the spring breeze,
she did not turn her blazing eyes away from him,
till she conceived a flame through her whole body
that burned utterly to the depths of her bones.
Ah sadly the Boy incites inexorable passion
in chaste hearts, he who mixes joy and pains for mortals,
and she who rules Golgos and leafy Idalia,
even she, who shakes the mind of a smitten girl,
often sighing for a blonde-haired stranger!
How many fears the girl suffers in her weak heart!
How often she grows pallid: more so than pale gold.
As Theseus went off eager to fight the savage monster
either death approached or fame’s reward!
Promising small gifts, not unwelcome or in vain,
she made her prayers to the gods with closed lips.
Now as a storm uproots a quivering branch of oak,
or a cone-bearing pine with resinous bark, on the heights
of Mount Taurus, twisting its unconquered strength
in the wind (it falls headlong, far off, plucked out
by the roots, shattering anything and everything in its way)
so Theseus upended the conquered body of the beast
its useless horns overthrown, emptied of breath.
Then he turned back, unharmed, to great glory,
guided by the wandering track of fine thread,
so that his exit from the fickle labyrinth of the palace
would not be prevented by some unnoticed error.
But what should I relate, digressing further
from my poem’s theme: the girl, abandoning
her father’s sight, her sisters’ embraces, and lastly
her mother’s, she wretched at her lost daughter’s joy
in preferring the sweet love of Theseus to all this:
or her being carried by ship to Naxos’s foaming shore,
or her consort with uncaring heart vanishing,
she conquered, her eyes softening in sleep?
Often loud shrieks cried the frenzy in her ardent heart
poured out from the depths of her breast,
and then she would climb the steep cliffs in her grief,
where the vast sea-surge stretches out to the view,
then run against the waves into the salt tremor
holding her soft clothes above her naked calves,
and call out mournfully this last complaint,
a frozen sob issuing from her wet face:
‘False Theseus, is this why you take me from my father’s land,
faithless man, to abandon me on a desert shore?
Is this how you vanish, heedless of the god’s power,
ah, uncaring, bearing home your accursed perjuries?
Nothing could alter the measure of your cruel mind?
No mercy was near to you, inexorable man,
that you might take pity on my heart?
Yet once you made promises to me in that flattering voice,
you told me to hope, not for this misery
but for joyful marriage, the longed-for wedding songs,
all in vain, dispersed on the airy breezes.
Now, no woman should believe a man’s pledges,
or believe there’s any truth in a man’s words:
when their minds are intent on their desire,
they have no fear of oaths, don’t spare their promises:
but as soon as the lust of their eager mind is slaked
they fear no words, they care nothing for perjury.
Surely I rescued you from the midst of the tempest
of fate, and more, I gave up my half-brother,
whom I abandoned to you with treachery at the end.
For that I’m left to be torn apart by beasts, and a prey
to sea-birds, unburied, when dead, in the scattered earth.
What lioness whelped you under a desert rock,
what sea conceived and spat you from foaming waves,
what Syrtis, what fierce Scylla, what vast Charybdis,
you who return me this, for the gift of your sweet life?
If marriage with me was not in your heart,
because you feared your old father’s cruel precepts,
you could still have led me back to your house,
where I would have served you, a slave happy in her task,
washing your beautiful feet in clear water,
covering your bed with the purple fabric.
But why complain to the uncaring wind in vain?
It is beyond evil, and without senses, unable
to hear what is said, without voice to reply.
It is already turning now towards mid-ocean,
and nothing human appears in this waste of weed.
So cruel chance taunts me in my last moments,
even depriving my ears of my own lament.
All-powerful Jupiter, if only the Athenian ships
had not touched the shores of Cnossos, from the start,
carrying their fatal cargo for the ungovernable bull,
a faithless captain mooring his ropes to Crete,
an evil guest, hiding a cruel purpose under a handsome
appearance, finding rest in our halls!
Now where can I return? What desperate hope
depend on? Shall I seek out the slopes of Ida?
But the cruel sea with its divisive depths
of water separates me from them.
Or shall I hope for my father’s help? Did I not leave him,
to follow a man stained with my brother’s blood?
Or should I trust in a husband’s love to console me?
Who hardly bends slow oars in running from me?
More, I’m alive on a lonely island without shelter,
and no escape seen from the encircling ocean waves.
No way to fly, no hope: all is mute,
all is deserted, all speaks of ruin.
Yet still my eyes do not droop in death,
not till my senses have left my weary body,
till true justice is handed down by the gods,
and the divine help I pray for in my last hour.
So you Eumenides who punish by avenging
the crimes of men, your foreheads crowned
with snaky hair, bearing anger in your breath,
here, here, come to me, listen to my complaints,
that I, wretched alas, force, weakened, burning,
out of the marrow of my bones, blind with mad rage.
Since these truths are born in the depths of my breast,
you won’t allow my lament to pass you by,
but as Theseus left me alone, through his intent,
goddesses, by that will, pursue him and his with murder.’
When these words had poured from her sad breast,
the troubled girl praying for cruel actions,
the chief of the gods nodded with unconquerable will:
at which the earth and the cruel sea trembled
and the glittering stars shook in the heavens.
Now Theseus’s mind was filled with a dark mist
and all the instructions he had held fixed in memory
before this, were erased from his thoughts,
failing to raise the sweet signal to his mourning father,
when the harbour of Athens safely came in sight.
For they say that when Aegeus parted from his son,
as the goddess’s ship left the city, he yielded him
to the wind’s embrace with these words:
‘Son, more dear to me than my long life,
son, whom I abandoned through chance uncertainty,
lately returned to me in the last days of my old age,
since my fate and your fierce virtue tear you away
from me, against my will, whose failing eyes
are not yet sated with my dear son’s face,
I don’t send you off happily with joyful heart,
or allow you to carry flags of good fortune,
but start with the many sorrows in my mind,
marring my white hairs with earth and sprinkled ashes,
then hang unfinished canvas from the wandering mast,
so the darkened sail of gloomy Spanish flax
might speak the grief and passion in my mind.
But if the one who dwells in sacred Iton, who promised
to defend the people and city of Erectheus, allows you
to wet your hand with the blood of the bull,
then make sure this command is done, buried in your
remembering heart, not to be erased by time:
that as soon as you set eyes on our hills,
strip the dark fabric fully from the yards,
and hoist white sails with your twisted ropes,
so that seeing them from the first, I’ll know joy
in my glad heart, when a happy time reveals your return.’
These words to Theseus, once held constantly in mind,
vanished like clouds of snow struck by a blast of wind
on the summits of high mountains.
But when his father, searching the view from the citadel’s height,
endless tears flooding his anxious eyes,
first saw the sails of dark fabric,
he threw himself head first from the height of the cliff,
believing Theseus lost to inexorable fate.
So fierce Theseus entered the palace in mourning
for his father’s death, and knew the same grief of mind
that he had caused neglected Ariadne,
she who was gazing then where his ship had vanished
pondering the many cares in her wounded heart.
But bright Bacchus hurries from elsewhere
with his chorus of Satyrs and Silenes from Nysa,
seeking you, Ariadne, burning with love for you.
In rapture his Bacchantes raved madly, crazed in mind,
with cries of ‘euhoe’ and tossing heads,
some brandished the thyrsus with hidden tip,
some flourished the torn limbs of bullocks,
some wreathed themselves with twining snakes,
some celebrated the secret rites of the hollow box,
rights they wished the profane to hear in vain:
others beat the drums with the flat of their hands,
or raised a clear ringing from rounded cymbals:
they blew endless strident calls on the horns
and the barbarous flute shrilled with fearful tunes.
Such the splendid workings of figured tapestry
covering the sacred couch its cloth embraced.
The people of Thessaly after gazing eagerly
were satisfied, they began to leave the goddess’s sanctuary.
As Zephyr stirs the willing waves, ruffling
the placid sea with morning breeze,
while Aurora rises to the wandering Sun’s threshold,
so that at first they move slowly struck by a gentle blast,
and their splashing resounds with slight lamentation,
while afterwards they increase, swelling more and more,
and reflect the red of the sunrise far-off as they rise:
so, here and there, with wandering feet the crowd disperse
to their homes, leaving the courtyard of the royal palace.
After their departure Chiron, the Centaur’s leader,
arrived from steep Pelion carrying woodland gifts:
since what the fields bear, whatever the country of Thessaly
yields on high peaks, whatever the flowers by the river’s waves
the fecund breath of the warm west wind produces,
he brought woven together in confused garlands,
so that the palace smiled, charmed by happy fragrances.
At once Peneus came to green Tempe,
Tempe, whose hanging woods encircle it above,
leaving Pasiphae to be honoured by the sea’s dance:
not empty-handed, since he carried a tall beech
by the roots, and long-leafed laurel from a straight trunk,
and was not without nodding plane, and pliant poplar,
scorched Phaethon’s sister, and airy cypress.
He placed them woven, here and there, round the house
till the courtyard was green, veiled with fresh foliage.
Prometheus followed after him, skilled in mind,
showing faint traces of his ancient punishment,
when once he suffered, hung in tight chains
from the high ledge of rock.
Then the father of the gods with his sacred consort,
and his sons, came down from the heavens,
leaving behind only you, Phoebus, and the one born
together with you, she who lives on the slopes of Ida:
Peleus is still disdained by both you and your sister,
and you will not celebrate Thetis’s wedding torches.
Then the gods seated their limbs at the white benches,
at tables richly heaped with various foods,
while, moving their bodies in trembling dance,
the Fates began to utter their prophetic song.
Quivering seized their bodies, their white ankles
wholly covered by the red hem of their dresses,
and a red headband circling their white hair,
and their hands were busy, as ever, at their eternal work.
The left hand held the distaff, wound with soft wool,
then the right, drawing out the thread lightly, shaped it
with upturned fingers, then, twisting it under the thumb,
turned the level spindle in smooth rotation,
and often a plucking tooth made the strands equal,
and fragments of wool, that once projected
from the light threads, clung to their dry lips:
and, before their feet, bright wool from a soft fleece
was guarded by a basket woven of willow.
Then in a clear voice, pushing away the fleece,
they poured out these prophecies in divine song,
song not to be proven wrong, by any amount of years.
‘Defence of Thessaly, dearest of Jupiter’s scions,
adding marvellous glory to your great powers,
accept what the glad sisters bring to the light,
true oracles: but you who accompany fate,
fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
Now Hesperus comes to you bearing the longed-for
bride, the wife approaches beneath a fortunate star,
who pours out her heart to you with tender love,
and prepares to lie with you in languid sleep,
spreading her delicate arms beneath your strong neck.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
No house has ever sheltered such love,
no love has ever joined lovers in such a union,
even as harmony comes to Thetis, and Peleus.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
A child Achilles is born to you, free of fear,
noted for never turning his back on an enemy, strong
of heart, who, often the victor in the fickle foot-race,
outstrips the swift deer with fiery hooves.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
No hero dare confront him in battle,
when the Phrygian rivers flow with the blood of Teucer’s people,
and the third heir of deceitful Pelops lays waste
the walls of Troy, besieged in the weary war.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
Often women at the funerals of their sons lament
his illustrious powers and bright deeds,
as neglected hair streams down from their white heads,
and weak hands mark their withered breasts.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
Now, as a reaper prematurely mowing the dense stalks,
scythes the golden fields under his eager feet,
he destroys the Trojan bodies with his fierce blade.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
Scamander’s waves that pour down in cascade to the swift
Hellespont will bear witness to his great courage,
its passage narrowed by the heaped bodies of the dead,
the deep waters mixed with warm blood.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
At last it will be witness also to a death-prize paid,
when a heaped tomb by the high rampart receives
the smooth white body of a sacrificed virgin girl.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
Then as luck grants the riches of the Trojan city
to the weary Greeks, loosening Neptune’s bond,
the high mound will be soaked with Polyxena’s blood:
who bowing like a sacrifice to the two-edged blade
will fall to her knees, a maimed corpse.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
So perform the wishes of your hearts, join in love.
Let the husband accept his goddess in joyful contract,
now the bride be given to her loving partner.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.
The nurse returning at daybreak will not
encircle her neck with yesterday’s ribbon,
nor the anxious mother by the sad bed of a troubled daughter,
forgo the hope of dear grandchildren.
Fly, guiding threads: fly, spindle.’
Such the song once sung of happy prophecy
to Peleus, from the Parcae’s divine hearts.
Once the gods in person visited the pure houses of heroes,
and showed themselves to the mortal crowd,
the gods were not yet used to men’s scorn for piety.
Often the father of the gods revisiting his bright temple,
when the annual rites came round on the holy days,
saw a hundred bulls lying on the ground.
Wandering Bacchus often led the shouting Bacchantes,
with their flowing hair, on the high peak of Parnassus,
when all rushing in emulation from the happy town
of Delphos received the god with smoking altars.
Often in the fatal struggles of war, Mars, or swift Minerva
the lady of Lake Tritonis, or virgin Artemis
appeared to exhort the crowds of armed men.
But afterwards earth was tainted by impious wickedness
and all fled from justice with eager minds,
the brother’s hand was stained with a brother’s blood,
the child ceased to mourn for its dead parents,
the father chose the younger son’s death to acquire
a single woman in her prime, the impious mother
spread herself beneath the unknowing son,
not afraid of desecrating the household shrine.
All piety was confused with impiety in evil frenzy
turning the righteous will of the gods from us.
So such as they do not visit our marriages,
nor allow themselves to approach us, in the light of day.
Though I’m continually worn out by grief’s pain,
removed, Hortalus, from the learned girls,
unable to bear the sweet fruit of the Muses,
the mind troubled by so many dark feelings
(for lately the flowing water in Lethe’s depths
washes at my brother’s pallid feet,
whom, torn from my eyes, the earth crushes
beneath the shore of Trojan Rhoeteum.
Am I never to see you hereafter, brother
more lovely than life? But I will always love you,
it’s true, always sing your death in mournful song,
as Daulian Procne sings in the dense shadow
of branches, lamenting dead Itylus’s fate)
even in such great sadness, Hortalus, I still send you
these verses in imitation of Callimachus,
lest you might think your words for no good reason
had been lost from my mind on the passing wind,
as the apple sent as a secret gift from a lover
rolls from the chaste girl’s breast,
placed under the soft clothing, sadly forgotten,
until, as she springs up at her mother’s approach,
it’s shaken out, and rolls down in headlong descent,
leaving a knowing blush on her sad face.
He who gazed at all the lights in the vast heavens,
who learnt the rise and setting of the stars,
how the fiery beauty of the swift sun’s darkened,
how constellations vanish at fixed times,
how sweet love entices Diana, secretly passing
near the Latmian cliffs, in her airy course:
that same Conon, the astronomer, saw me shining brightly
at heaven’s threshold, a lock of hair from Berenice’s head,
she who stretching out her delicate arms
made promises to a multitude of gods,
at that time when the great king newly married
was gone to lay waste the borders of Assyria,
bearing sweet traces of nocturnal strife,
those that are brought about by virgin spoils.
Is Venus really hated by new brides? Is parents’ joy
deceived by their false tears, shed copiously within
the threshold of the bed? If it were truth they sighed
they’d not have supported my divinity so.
My queen taught me that, with her many woeful cries,
when her new husband went off to grim battle.
And is it not the bereavement of an empty bed you mourn,
but the tearful separation from a dear brother?
How sad cares eat at the heart’s core from within!
As though, troubled, your mind is wholly lost,
robbed of all feeling in your breast!
But I recognise true greatness in a girl.
Surely that brave act is not forgotten by which a husband’s
kingdom was gained, that no one stronger dared?
But what sad words were said in sending off this husband!
Jupiter, how often your eyes were brushed by your hand!
What god has changed you so? Or is it a lovers wish
not to be absent from the beloved body for long?’
And, there too, you promised me, to all the gods,
not without blood of bulls, for your dear husband,
if it brought his return. It did not take him long
to add captive Asia to the bounds of Egypt.
I discharge former promises, for those deeds,
by this new tribute that joins me to the heavens.
Unwillingly, O Queen, I was parted from your hair,
unwillingly: I swear it by you and that head of yours,
that is worthy, even though one were to swear in vain:
but who could claim to be equal to steel itself?
Even the mountain’s overthrown by it, the greatest
bright child of Macedonia’s shores, over-passed
when the Persians created a new sea, when barbarians
drove their fleet through the midst of Athos.
What can hair do when such things fall to the blade?
By Jupiter, that the tribe of Chalybes might all perish,
and those who first pursued the search for veins of metal
below the earth, and how to cut tough things with iron!
A little while ago the sisters were mourning my fate
as a shorn lock, when, out of Locri, Arsínoe sent
the winged horses of Ethiopian Memnon himself,
beating, with quivering wings, Zephyrus’s,
the West Wind’s, air, the brother born with him,
and carrying me through the shadowed sky, he flew,
and placed me in chaste Venus’s lap.
Arsínoe herself sent her servant there,
Greek inhabitant of the Canoptic shore.
My arrival changed the heavens, so the golden crown
from Ariadne’s brow might not be fixed alone
in the bright sky: but, so that I too might shine,
a faithful spoil of that golden hair, the goddess
passing, wet from the flood, to the gods’ temple,
placed me as a new constellation among the old.
For, touching the Virgin’s stars and the savage Lion,
joined to Callisto daughter of Lycaon,
I fall towards the west, leading slow Bootës,
who merges tardily with the deep Ocean.
But though the footsteps of the gods touch me by night,
light still returns me to the ancient sea.
(Let this be known, by your leave, Fate, Virgin Ramnusia,
since I hide nothing of the truth through fear,
nor though the stars disperse me with angry words,
do I choose to hide the buried truth of the heart.)
I don’t delight in these things, as much as I suffer
from being parted, parted from my lady’s hair,
with which, when the girl used to try out
all perfumes, I myself absorbed many thousands.
Now you, whom the longed-for marriage torches join,
don’t surrender your bodies to mutual embrace,
baring your breasts with clothes removed,
before the onyx delights me with its pleasing gift,
your onyx, you who by right adorn the chaste bed.
But she who gives herself to impure adulteries,
let her absorb from sin the vain gift of light dust:
since I seek no prize from the undeserving.
But let great harmony, O brides, always inhabit
your house, continual love always.
You, my Queen, when you see your divine constellation,
as you placate Venus with festive lights,
don’t leave me free of your perfumes,
but endow me with more great gifts.
I wish that the stars would fall! I’d become royal hair,
and then let Orion shine next to Aquarius!
O hail, sweet door, pleasing to a husband, pleasing
to a father, and may Jupiter add his virtuous power to you,
who served Balbus faithfully, they say, for a good while,
when the old man owned the house himself,
and served the son, on the contrary, quite badly, it’s said,
when you became a wedding gift with the old man dead.
Come on, tell us, why exhibit this change
deserting old loyalties of ownership?
‘It’s not my fault (I please this Caecilius, I’m handed
over to now), though it’s said to be mine,
it’s no sin of mine that anyone can say anything:
truly a door of your people answers you,
me, to whom whenever some ill deed’s discovered
all cry out: “It’s your fault, door.”’
It’s not enough to say that, with a word,
but you must do what anyone might see and know.
‘How can I? No one asks or takes the trouble to know?’
I will, tell me, don’t hesitate.
‘Well first, the virgin, they say, who was handed over to us,
was false. The husband wasn’t the first to touch her,
he whose sword hangs limper than a tender beet,
never lifting the middle of his tunic:
but they say the father violated his son’s bed,
and disgraced the unfortunate house,
either because his impious mind burned with blind lust,
or because the son was useless, with barren seed,
so it was necessary to search for one more vigorous,
who could undo her virgin tie.’
You tell of an illustrious father with amazing piety.
who comes in his own son’s lap.
‘And Brescia under the cliffs of Cycnea,
that golden Mella with sweet water runs by,
Brescia dear mother of my Verona, says
he isn’t the only one known to have had her,
but speaks of Postumius and Cornelius with passion,
with whom she commited wicked adultery.
Here someone will have said? “How do you know,
door, never allowed to leave your master’s threshold,
or overhear people, but fixed to this post,
so accustomed to opening and closing the house?”
I’ve often heard her alone in a furtive voice
speak to her maids about her sins,
the names I’ve said being spoken, she expecting
that I’d have neither speech nor hearing.
Besides, she added, someone else, whose name
I don’t want to say, lest he raise his red eyebrow.
He’s a tall man, who fought a great lawsuit once,
about a false pregnancy in a lying womb.’
That you send this letter to me, written with tears,
to me, crushed by fate and bitter ill-fortune,
that I might raise up, and return from the threshold of death
one shipwrecked, cast from the foaming waves of the sea,
one whom sacred Venus deprives of gentle sleep,
forsaken, enduring an empty bed, not delighting
in the sweet songs of the Muse of the ancient poets,
lying awake all night with an anxious mind:
that’s pleasing to me, since you call me your friend,
and search here for the gifts of the Muses and Venus.
But in case my troubles aren’t known to you, Manlius,
or you think I dislike the duties of a friend,
let me tell of waves of misfortune that I myself plunge in,
lest you seek rich gifts any more from a wretched man.
At that time when the first white toga was handed me,
when my youth passed in flower through happy spring,
I played more than enough: the goddess was not unknown to me,
the work that mixed bitter with sweet.
But all my studies were lost in the grief at my brother’s death.
O wretched, to take my brother from me:
you brother, you, in dying, wrecked my good fortune,
with you our whole house is buried together,
with you all our joys perish in one,
that your love nourished in sweet life.
So that ruined in thought I forsake those studies
and all the delights of the mind.
Therefore, when you say that it’s shameful for Catullus
to be in Verona, that here someone well-known
only warms cold limbs in an empty bed,
it’s not shameful, Manlius, my sadness is great.
So pardon me if I don’t bestow those gifts on you
that grief takes from me, while I cannot.
Since there’s no great store of books here with me,
it needs me to be living in Rome: there’s my house,
there’s my place, there my time is spent:
only one of my many book-boxes follows me here.
since it’s so, don’t think I do anything with ill intent,
or that I’m lacking at all in noble feeling:
it’s on you and no other I seek to lavish riches:
besides I’d offer whatever riches I had.
I can’t conceal, goddesses, the things of mine
Allius helped with, or how many services he’s performed,
lest fleeting time in forgetful ages
hides this kindness of his in blind night:
but I tell it to you: speak to many future thousands
and let this paper speak in its old age,
and let the dead become more and more famous,
don’t let the spider spinning its fine web on high
perform its task on Allius’s neglected name.
For you know how fickle Venus would have troubled me,
and in what way she might have scorched me,
when I might have burned like the Sicilian rocks,
or the waters of Malis at Oetaean Thermopylae,
my grieving eyes not have ceased to melt with endless tears,
my cheeks to have been drenched with a saddened rain.
Then like a mountain stream shining on airy heights,
springing from mossy rock, that, having fallen
headlong from sloping valleys, passes
through the midst of densely populated regions,
sweet comfort to travellers’ weary labour,
when fierce heat splits the dried-up fields:
like to a favourable wind that comes breathing lightly
to the sailor tossed in the black tempest,
now praying to Pollux, now imploring Castor,
such was Allius’s help to me.
He opened the closed field with a wide path,
and granted my self and my girl a house,
where we carried on our mutual affair,
to which my bright goddess repaired
with gentle steps, set her graceful sandals
on the worn threshold, rested her shining feet,
as once with blazing passion Laodamia came
to the house, begun in vain, of Protesilaus
her husband, the sacrifice not yet appeasing
the gods’ love of sacred blood.
Let nothing please me much, Fate, Ramnusian Virgin,
that you by chance may receive unwillingly.
Laodamia learnt from the loss of her husband
how the hungry altar desires holy blood:
she was forced to loose her new spouse’s neck,
before one winter, and another returning,
had sated eager love with their long nights,
so she might learn to live without a lost husband,
whom the Fates knew would not live long
if he went as a soldier to the walls of Troy.
For now Helen’s abduction had forced
the Greek nobles to rouse their men for Troy,
Troy (the evil!) a common grave for Asia and Europe,
Troy the bitter ruin of men and of all virtue,
have you not even brought my brother’s death.
Oh alas for the brother taken from me,
oh alas the shining light of a brother lost,
with you our whole house is buried together,
with you all our joys perish in one,
that your love nourished in sweet life.
You who, far away, are not interred among famous tombs,
nor near the ashes of the known,
but vile Troy, unhappy Troy, holds your grave,
in the furthest soil of an alien land.
To which they say the men of Greece hurried
from every side, deserting their household shrines,
lest Paris, delighted, carried off at leisure,
to a peaceful bed, the adulteress he’d abducted.
Through your misfortune, then, loveliest Laodamia
your husband was taken from you, dearer to you
than life and spirit: love’s passion, swallowing you
in a whirlpool, carried you into the steep abyss,
as they say the soil of Greek Pheneus near Cyllene
dried up, when the thick swamp was drained,
that Hercules, the divinely-fathered, once dared to lance,
in the hacked out marrow of the mountains,
when his sure arrows struck the Stymphalian birds,
at a worse master’s command, so that the threshold
of the heavens might be frequented by more gods,
and Hebe might not long remain a virgin.
But your deep love, that taught an untamed girl
to bear the yoke, was deeper still than that abyss.
Since the grandchild nursed by an only daughter,
is not as dear to her father, child of his old age,
that, when the child’s name is barely entered
in the grandfather’s will, disposing of his riches,
removing the scornful family’s impious joy,
scatters the vultures from his white head:
no spouse was ever as pleasing to a white dove,
that they say often sinfully gives far more kisses
nipping with its beak, than any woman
who beyond measure longs for as much.
But you alone outdo their great passion,
you who are won for ever by a golden-haired man.
You to whom the light of my life conceded little
or nothing in worth, when she gave herself
into my lap, who often shone, with Cupid
running about her, bright in his saffron tunic.
Even if she’s still not content with Catullus alone,
I’ll suffer the infrequent affairs of a shy mistress,
lest I’m too annoying in the manner of fools.
Often even Juno, greatest of goddesses,
swallows her burning anger with her spouse’s sins,
knowing the many affairs of all-willing Jupiter.
And men are not to be compared with the gods,
bear the thankless burden of a worried father.
Yet, led by no father’s hand, she comes to me,
to the house, fragrant with Assyrian perfumes,
brings me the marvellous gift in the secret night,
she herself, stolen away from her husband’s breast.
And that is enough, if that alone’s granted to me,
that she marks out that day with a brighter light.
This then Allius, for you, what I can, a gift
made of song, in return for your friendship,
lest this day and that, and others on others
touch your name with corrosions of rust.
And let the gods add more to this, those gifts
Themis once used to bring to the pious of old.
May you be happy, both you and your life,
both your house in which we joyed, and the lady,
and he who first gave you to me,
from which source all our good was born, and she,
before everything, dearer to me than him, light of my life,
through whose being alive, living is sweet to me.
I’m not surprised as to why no girl desires
to place her gentle thighs beneath you, Rufus,
not if you were to weaken her with gifts
of rarest dresses, the delights of clearest gems.
A certain evil story wounds you: that they tell
about you: that you’ve a wild goat under the armpits.
Everyone hates that, no wonder: since it’s a truly
evil-smelling beast, not one that girls bed with.
So either kill the cruel plague to their noses,
or cease to wonder why they run away.
My girl says she’d rather marry no one but me,
not if Jupiter himself were to ask her.
She says: but what a girl says to her eager lover,
should be written on the wind and in running water.
If a goat’s smell under the arms rightly prevents anyone,
or if a slow gout deservedly cripples them,
your rival, who keeps your lover busy,
is discovered by you to be wonderfully sick with both.
Now whenever he fucks her, you’re revenged on the pair:
she’s troubled by the smell, he’s ruined by the gout.
Once you said you preferred Catullus alone,
Lesbia: would not have Jupiter before me.
I prized you then not like an ordinary lover,
but as a father prizes his children, his family.
Now I know you: so, though I burn more fiercely,
yet you’re worth much less to me, and slighter.
How is that, you ask? The pain of such love
makes a lover love more, but like less.
Stop wanting to be kind to all and sundry,
or believing someone can become good.
All are ungrateful: being generous achieves nothing,
rather it wearies even, and greatly harms:
so with me, whom no one oppresses as heavily, bitterly,
as he who once held me to be his one and only friend.
Gellius had heard his uncle used to rebuke,
anyone who performed or spoke about love’s delights.
To avoid this misfortune himself, he seduced
his uncle’s wife, and made his uncle a silent Harpocrates.
What he wanted, he did: for, now though he buggered
his uncle himself, his uncle would not say a word.
My mind’s reduced to this, by your faults, Lesbia,
and has ruined itself so in your service,
that now it couldn’t wish you well,
were you to become what’s best,
or stop loving you if you do what’s worst.
If recalling past good deeds is pleasant to a man,
when he thinks himself to have been virtuous,
not violating sacred ties, nor using the names of gods
in any contract in order to deceive men,
then there are many pleasures left to you, Catullus,
in the rest of life, due to this thankless passion.
Since whatever good a man can do or say
to anyone, has been said and done by you.
All, that entrusted to a thankless heart is lost.
Why torment yourself then any longer?
Why not harden your mind, and shrink from it,
and cease to be unhappy, since the gods are hostile?
It’s difficult to suddenly let go of a former love,
it’s difficult, but it would gratify you to do it:
That’s your one salvation. That’s for you to prove,
for you to try, whether you can or not.
O gods, if mercy is yours, or if you ever brought help
to a man at the very moment of his death,
gaze at my pain and, if I’ve lived purely,
lift this plague, this destruction from me,
so that the torpor that creeps into my body’s depths
drives out every joy from my heart.
I no longer ask that she loves me to my face,
or, the impossible, that she be chaste:
I choose health, and to rid myself of this foul illness.
O gods, grant me this for all my kindness.
Rufus, trusted by me as a friend, uselessly and pointlessly,
(Uselessly? Rather, at a great and evil price),
have you crept into my life like this, and ruptured
my entrails, ah alas, have you robbed me of all my good?
You’ve robbed me, oh cruel poison of my life,
oh ruin of my friendship.
Gallus has brothers, of whom one has the loveliest wife
the other the loveliest son.
Gallus is a cute man: since he joins them as lovers,
so that beautiful boy beds with beautiful girl.
Gallus is a stupid man, not seeing himself as a husband,
who instructs a nephew in an uncle’s wife’s adultery.
But now I grieve that your foul saliva
has polluted the pure lips of a pure girl.
Still you’ll not do it with impunity: now all the years
will know you, and ancient tradition tell what you are.
Lesbius is pretty. Why not? Since Lesbia likes him
more than you and all your people, Catullus.
But still let this pretty boy sell Catullus and all his people
if he should find three to acknowledge his birth.
What can I say, Gellius, as to why those red lips
become whiter than winter snow,
when you leave your house in the morning or when
the eighth hour wakes you placid and weak in the long day?
It’s something, for sure: perhaps rumour’s whisper is true
that you swallow the tall jet from a man’s groin?
this is for sure: Victor’s strained thighs proclaim it,
and your lips marked with dried semen.
Can there be no one in all these people, Iuventius,
no nice man you might begin to like,
besides that guest of yours, yellower than a gilded statue,
from the environs of deadly Pesaro,
who pleases you now, whom you dare to prefer
to me, and do who knows what with?
Quintius, if you want Catullus to owe you his eyes
or something that might be more dear than his eyes,
don’t steal from him what’s much dearer to him
than his eyes, or something dearer than eyes.
Lesbia says bad things about me to her husband’s face:
it’s the greatest delight to that fool.
Mule, don’t you see? If she forgot and was silent about me,
that would be right: now since she moans and abuses,
she not only remembers, but something more serious,
she’s angry. That is, she’s inflamed, so she speaks.
Arrius said chonvenient when he meant to say
convenient, and ambush was hambush,
and trusted he’d spoken amazingly well,
when he’d said hambush as much as he could.
So, I guess, his mother and uncle spoke, freely,
so his maternal grandfather, grandmother.
When he was posted to Syria our ears had a rest,
they heard the same things said softly and easily,
nor feared to hear such words in future,
when suddenly terrible news is brought,
the Ionian Sea, since Arrius got there,
is not Ionian now, but Hionian.
I hate and love. And why, perhaps you’ll ask.
I don’t know: but I feel, and I’m tormented.
Quintia’s lovely to many. To me she’s white, long,
and straight: I acknowledge that’s so.
But I don’t agree that’s beauty: there’s no charm,
there’s not a speck of good taste in all of that long body.
Lesbia’s lovely, possessed of all that’s most beautiful,
besides she alone’s stolen all charm from all other women.
No woman can say she’s been loved so much,
as my Lesbia in truth’s been loved by me.
No faith in any tie was ever so great,
as has been found, on my part, in love of you.
What’s he doing, Gellius, the man who wantons
with mother and sister, up all night, with no clothes on?
What’s he doing, who won’t let his uncle play husband?
Do you know how much sin any man might incur?
O Gellius, he incurs so much not furthest Tethys
can wash it away, nor Ocean begetter of Nymphs:
since there’s no sin at all that exists beyond that one,
not if he bent his head, and swallowed himself.
Gellius is thin: why wouldn’t he be? Whose mother enjoys life,
so kind and so healthy, and a sister so charming,
and so kind an uncle, and everywhere filled so with
girls who’re related, why should he leave off being lean?
Though he touched nothing, but what it’s illegal to touch,
you’d find any number of reasons why he’d be lean.
Let a Magus be born from the sinful union
of Gellius and his mother, and learn Persian soothsaying:
since a Magus ought to be born from a mother and son,
if the impious religion of the Persians is true,
so with acceptable chants he’ll pleasingly worship the gods
melting the entrails in the greasy flame.
It’s not because I knew you well or thought you faithful,
Gellius, or thought you could keep your mind from vile sin,
that I expected you to be true to me
in this hopeless ruinous love of mine:
but because I was aware that she, for whom a vast desire
consumes me, was no mother or sister of yours.
And though I was closely linked to you by friendship,
I didn’t think that was enough excuse for you.
You considered it enough: there’s so much pleasure
in every game to you, in which there’s any sin.
Lesbia always speaks ill of me, never shuts up
about me: damn me if she doesn’t love me.
What’s the sign? Because it’s the same with me: I’m
continually complaining, but damn me if I don’t love her.
I’ve no great inclination to want to please you, Caesar,
or to know which of the two you are, black or white.
Mentula the Cock fornicates. Does a Cock fuck? For sure.
That’s what they say: the pot picks its own herbs.
My Cinna’s Smyrna is published at last, nine
summers and winters after it was begun,
while from Hatria there’s half a million verses a year
Smyrna, reaching the deep streams of Cyprian Satrachus,
white-haired centuries will long read Smyrna.
But Volusian annals will be stillborn in Padua,
and often provide a limp wrapper for mackerel.
Let my friend’s little monument be dear to me,
and the masses delight in swollen Antimachus.
If anything from our grief, can reach beyond
the mute grave, Calvus, and be pleasing and welcome,
grief with which, in longing, we revive our lost loves,
and weep for vanished friendships once known,
surely Quintilia’s not so much sad for her early death,
as joyful for your love.
I did not (may the gods love me) think it mattered,
whether I might be smelling Aemilius’s mouth or arse.
The one’s no cleaner, the other’s no dirtier,
in fact his arse is both cleaner and nicer:
since it’s no teeth. Indeed, the other has
foot long teeth, gums like an old box-cart,
and jaws that usually gape like the open
cunt of a pissing mule on heat.
He fucks lots of women, and makes himself out
to be charming, and isn’t set to the mill with the ass?
Shouldn’t we think, of any girl touching him,
she’s capable of licking a foul hangman’s arse?
About you, if anyone, Stinking Victius, can be said
what they say of the verbose and fatuous.
With that tongue, if the need arose,
you could lick arses, and leather-soled sandals.
If you want to destroy us completely, Victius,
gape at us: what you desire you’ll wholly achieve.
I stole a sweet kiss while you played, sweet Iuventius,
one sweeter than sweetest ambrosia.
Not taken indeed with impunity: for more than an hour
I remember, I hung at the top of the gallows,
while I was justifying myself to you, yet with my tears
I couldn’t lessen your anger a tiny morsel.
No sooner was it done, than, your lips rinsed
with plenty of water, you banished it with your fingers,
so nothing contracted from my lips might remain,
as though it were the foul spit of a tainted whore.
More, you handed me unhappily to vicious love
who’s not failed to torment me in every way,
so that sweet kiss, altered for me from ambrosia,
was more bitter than bitter hellebore then.
Since you lay down such punishments for unhappy love,
now, after this, I’ll never steal kisses again.
Caelius with Aufilenus, and Quintius with Aufilena,
both madly in love with the brother, the sister,
the flower of Veronese youth. That as they say’s
truly sweet, that fellowship of brothers.
Who shall I favour more? You, Caelius, since
your friendship, alone, saw me through my passion,
when the furious flames scorched me to the core.
Be happy, Caelius, be successful in love.
Carried over many seas, and through many nations,
brother, I come to these sad funeral rites,
to grant you the last gifts to the dead,
and speak in vain to your mute ashes.
Seeing that fate has stolen from me your very self.
Ah alas, my brother, taken shamefully from me,
yet, by the ancient custom of our parents,
receive these sad gifts, offerings to the dead,
soaked deeply with a brother’s tears,
and for eternity, brother: ‘Hail and Farewell!’
If anything was ever entrusted by a friend to a silent
sure one, whose loyalty of spirit is deeply known,
you’ll find I’m equally bound by that sacred rite,
Cornelius, and turned into a pure Harpocrates.
Silo, please return the ten sestertii,
and then be as wild and unruly as you like:
or, if you like the money, please leave off
being a pander, and wild and unruly too.
Do you think I could speak ill of my own life,
she who’s dearer to me than my two eyes?
I couldn’t, nor, if I could, would I love so desperately:
but you, with Tappo, you do everything monstrous.
Mentula the Cock tries to climb the Parnassian Mount:
the Muses with pitchforks toss him out, head first.
When you see one who’s an auctioneer with a pretty boy,
what to think, but that he wants to advertise himself?
If anything happens to one who desires it, and wishes
and never expects it, it’s a special delight to the mind.
Likewise, this is delight, dearer than gold, to me,
that you come back to me, Lesbia, in my longing.
come back, desired and un-hoped for, give yourself
back to me. O day marked out with greater brightness!
Who exists more happily than me, or can say
that he wishes for any life greater than this?
If your white-haired old age, soiled by your impure ways,
is ended by will of the people, Cominius,
I’ve no doubt, for my part, your tongue, first, the enemy
of good, will be cut out, and given to eager vultures,
your eyes gouged out, swallowed by black-throated ravens,
your intestines by dogs, the rest of your body by wolves.
You declare that this love of ours will be happy,
mea vita, and eternal between us.
Great gods, let it be that she promises truthfully,
and says it sincerely, and from her heart,
so we may extend, through the whole of our life,
this endless bond of sacred friendship.
Aufilena, just mistresses are always praised:
they accept their reward, for what they agree to.
You, who promised, dishonestly hostile, to me,
who don’t give but just take, you do wrong.
To carry it through would be fine, Aufilena,
not to promise is chaste: but to snatch at what’s given
in fraudulent service, is worse than the greediest whore
who offers herself with her whole body.
To live content with one man, Aufilena,
is the glory of highest glories for a bride:
but its better to sleep with whoever she likes,
than be mother of her cousins by her uncle.
You’re a lot of man, Naso, but lots of men
wouldn’t stoop to you: Naso, a lot of man and a pathic.
In Pompey’s first Consulate two men frequented Maecilia,
Cinna: now he is Consul again
those two remain, but each one’s increased by a thousand.
The fruitful seed of adultery.
They say, no lie, that Mentula the Cock is rich
with the pastures of Firmum, full of good things,
fowling of every kind, fish, meadows, fields and game.
In vain: his income’s surpassed by his costs.
So, I concede he’s rich, while everything’s lacking.
lets praise the pastures, so long as he’s in want.
Mentula’s good for thirty acres of meadows,
forty of fields: the rest of it’s marsh.
Why shouldn’t he exceed Croesus in riches,
one who possesses so many assets, in land,
meadows, fields, vast woods and pastures and pools
as far as the Hyperboreans, and Ocean’s seas?
All this is great, but he’s the greatest of all,
not a man, but, in truth, a great projecting Cock.
I’ve often been searching around, my busy mind hunting,
as to how I could send you Callimachus’s poems,
so they’d soften you towards me, so you’d not try
to land your hostile shafts on my head,
now I see I’ve troubled myself in vain,
Gellius, my good intentions were worthless.
I’ll evade the shafts of yours you fire at me,
but you’ll be punished, fixed for ever by mine.

To whom do I dedicate this charming slim volume,
just now polished with dry pumice stone?
For you Cornellius, for you were accustomed to think
that my scribblings were something.
When already at the same time, you alone
dared to unfold the whole age of Italians in three scrolls,
learned, by Jupiter, and weighty!
For that reason have for yourself whatever this little book is,
and whatever you like, oh patron maiden,
let it last a long time, for more than one generation!
To whom do I dedicate this charming slim volume,
just now polished with dry pumice stone?
For you Cornellius, for you were accustomed to think
that my scribblings were something.
When already at the same time, you alone
dared to unfold the whole age of Italians in three scrolls,
learned, by Jupiter, and weighty!
For that reason have for yourself whatever this little book is,
and whatever you like, oh patron maiden,
let it last a long time, for more than one generation!
Sparrow, favorite of my girl,
with whom she is accustomed to play, whom she is accustomed to hold in her lap,
for whom, seeking greedily, she is accustomed to give her index finger
and to provoke sharp bites.
When it is pleasing for my shining desire
to make some kind of joke
and a relief of her grief.
I believe, so that her heavy passion may become quiet.
If only I were able to play with you yourself, and
to lighten the sad cares of your mind.
Mourn, oh Cupids and Venuses,
and whatever there is of rather pleasing men:
the sparrow of my girlfriend has died,
the sparrow, delight of my girl,
whom she loved more than her own eyes.
For it was honey-sweet and it had known its
mistress as well as a girl knew her mother,
nor did it move itself from her lap,
but jumping around now here now there
he used to chirp continually to his mistress alone:
who now goes through that gloomy journey
from whence they denied anyone returns.
But may it go badly for you, bad darkness
of Orcus, you who devour all beautiful things:
and so beautiful a bird you taken away from me
o bad deed! o miserable sparrow!
Now on account of your work my girl's
slightly swollen little eyes are red from weeping.
That boat that you see guests
says that it was the fastest of ships
it was able to surpass the speed of any other boat
or if there was a need
for an oar or sail to fly
And the boat denies that the shore of the threatning
Adriatic denies this, or the cyclades islands
the famous island of Rhodus, wild Thracian
rough sea of Marmara, Pontus bay
where it later a small boat was previously
the woods having much foliage; for in the Cytorian ridge
with its whistiling leaves often produce whistling
Pontiac Amastris and box bearing Cytorus
the boat said that these things have been
well known to you from its earliest days
he said that he stood on top
you have dipped oars into your sea
and then, to have carried his master
through so many raging seas, whether a breeze was
calling from the left or from the right
or if at the same time a favorable breeze fell upon each foot
and he says neither any prayers to the Gods of the shore
was done by him, when the boat was coming
from the newest sea all the way to the clear lake
But these events came earlier; now you are old
in a hidden rest and dedicates itself to you
the twin Castor and twin of Castor.
Let us live, my Lesbia, and let us love,
and let us judge all the rumors of the old men
to be worth just one penny!
The suns are able to fall and rise:
When that brief light has fallen for us,
we must sleep a never ending night.
Give me a thousand kisses, then another hundred,
then another thousand, then a second hundred,
then yet another thousand more, then another hundred.
Then, when we have made many thousands,
we will mix them all up so that we don't know,
and so that no one can be jealous of us when he finds out
how many kisses we have shared.
Flavius, unless she were unpretty and inelegant, you would want to speak
of your darling to Catullus and you wouldn't be able to keep quiet, but
you love some feverish harlot. You are ashamed to admit this. For your bed
shouts that you, vainly quiet, do not lie for empty nights fragrant with
garlands and Syrian ointment, and the bolster equally worn away on this
side and that, and the creaking and movement of your shaking bed. There's
no point in being quiet about your debauchery. Why? You would not reveal
such tired from debauchery flanks unless you were up to something silly. Therefore
tell us whatever you have, whether its good or bad. I want to describe you
and your love to the sky in my nice little verse.
You ask, my Lesbia, how many of your kisses
are enough and more than enough for me.
As big a number as the Libyan grains of sand
that lie at silphium producing Cyrene
between the oracle of Sultry Jupiter
and the sacred tomb of old Battus;
Or as many stars that see the secret love affairs of men,
when the night is silent.
So many kisses are enough
and more than enough for mad Catullus to kiss you,
these kisses which neither the inquisitive are able to count
nor an evil tongue bewitch.
Poor Catullus, you must stop being silly,
and count as lost what you see is lost.
Once the sun shone bright for you,
when you would go whither your sweetheart led,
she who was loved by me as none will ever be loved.
Then there took place those many jolly scenes
which you desired nor did your sweetheart not desire.
Truly the sun shone bright for you.
Now she desires no more: do you too, weakling, not desire;
and do not chase her who flees, nor live in unhappiness,
but harden your heart, endure and stand fast.
Goodbye, sweetheart. Catullus now stands fast:
he will not look for you or court you against your will.
But you will be sorry when you are not courted at all.
Wretch, pity on you! What life lies in store for you!
Who will come to you now? Who will think you pretty?
Whom will you love now? Who will people say you are?
Whom will you kiss? Whose lips will you bite?
But you, Catullus, be resolute and stand fast.
Veranius, being superior to all
300,000 of my friends in my eyes
Have you come home to your household gods
and loving brothers and old mother?
Youve come back! o happy news for me!
I will see you unharmed and i will hear
you telling about places of the spaniards, the deeds, the tribes
as it is your custom, and drawing your neck close
will I kiss the delightful eyes and lips?
O how many happy men there are,
who is happier and more blessed than I am?
My Varus led me at leisure
from the forum to see his girlfriend
little whore, as it was them seen by me immediately
she is not very uncharming neither is she unattractive.
As we came there, several conversations fell
upon us: among which what now
Bithynia was; how it was holding itself;
and with what money had it profited me.
I responded that which was none, neither for the natives of Bithynia
nor for their governers not for their staff,
with which anyone could have a more richly combed head of hair
especially when those whose governer was a shithead
who also didn't value his staff worth a hair
"But certainly however" they said "that which is said
is the custom there to be born, you obtained
men for a litter" I, like one lucky fellow
in the eyes of the girl said
"It was not so bad for me,
although, a bad province fell to me,
that I was not able to prepare 8 strong men."
But for me no one was in the place nor there,
who could put the broken legs of an old cot
on his neck.
At this point, as it was appropriate for the shameless one,
"I ask you please" she said "for me, my Catullus for a little while
lend me those litter bearers, for I wish
for them to carry me to the temple of Serapis.
"Wait," I say to the girl,
"what which I had said good judgement
must have escaped me
Cinna Gaius prepared it - but whether
the litter bearers belong to me or to you?
Use as well as if I had prepared them for myself.
But you without salt are bad and bothersome,
through that it is not permitted to be careless!"
Furius and Aurelius, companions of Catullus,
whether he penetrates the furthest of the Indies,
or the shore where the beating of the eastern
waves resonates far and wide,
whether he penetrates into the Hyrcanos or the gentle Arabs,
or the arrow-carrying Parthians,
or the seven fold Nile
which colors the plains,
whether he will go across the great Alps,
intending to see the great monument to Caesar,
or the Gallic Rhine or the horribly dis-
tant Britain,
you who are prepared to try all these things,
and whatever else the will of the gods will bring,
announce to my girl a few
nasty words.
Let her live and let her flourish with her adulterers,
whom having embraced 300 of them at the same time, she owns and keeps them,
truly loving none of them, but repeatedly breaking the groins of
all of them;
nor, let her no longer look back for my love as before,
which by her fault, has fallen,
just like the farthest flower of the field
has been killed by a passing plow.
Asinius Marrucinus, left hand
You do not use well: in joke and wine
You lift the napkins of the more careless.
Do you think that this is witty? It escapes you, foolish man
This thing is utterly sordid and unattractive.
Do you not believe me? Believe you brother Pollio
Who would wish that your acts of stealing
Be changed for even a talent - for the boy
Is full of charm and wit.
Therefore expect either 300 hendecasyllabic verses
Or send back the napkin to me,
Which does not move me by means of price,
But rather it is a souvenir of my friend.
For Fabullus and Veranius sent Saetaban napkins
From the Spaniards to me as a gift;
It is necessary that I love these things
As I love my little Veranius and Fabullus.
You will dine well with me, my Fabullus, in a few days,
if the gods favor you, if you bring with you a good and large dinner,
not without a dazzling girl and wine and wit and all your loud laughter.
If you bring these things, I say, our charming one,
you will eat well; for the wallet of your Catullus is full of cobwebs.
But in return, you receive pure loves of anything that is more sweet or elegant:
for I will give you perfume, which the Venuses and Cupids gave to my girl,
which, when you smell it, you will ask the gods,
Fabullus, to make all of you a nose.
If I did not love you more than my eyes,
most delightful Calvus, I would hate you
with a Vitinian* hatred because of that gift of yours:
for what did I do or what did I say,
why do you ruin me with so many bad poets?
May the gods pile many adversities on that client,
who sent to you such a pack of sinners.
But if, as I do suspect, this new and choice
gift does Sulla the schoolmaster give you,
I am not upset, but rather well pleased,
since your labors haven't been wasted **.
Great gods above, that horrible and cursed little book!
Surely you sent it to your Catullus,
so that he might die, again and again, on that day,
during the Saturnalia too, the best of days!
It won't end like this for you, oh no, my clever one.
For, if there is light, to the booksellers'
shelves will I dash, and Caesius, Aquinus,
Suffenus, the entire poisonous collection:
I will repay you with these punishments.
You bad poets, meanwhile, farewell, get out of here,
go to that place, from where you got your bad feet.
Curses of our time, very bad poets.
* Vatinius was a man he prosecuted in court.
** Catullus jokes that the book of bad poetry was Calvus' payment for his capacities as lawyer to Sulla.
© copyright 9-8-1998 by David Kimel
Pose your questions, help others, and post your translations and notes at the Catullus Forum.
I entrust my loved ones and myself to you, Aurelius.
And I humbly ask a favor from you,
that if you have ever valued anything,
which you might have wished to keep pure and true,
then modestly guard my boy for me,
not I say from the populace, I don't fear
them who just pass by here and there on the street
occupied with their own affairs.
In truth, I am afraid of you and your penis,
hostile to boys, both good and bad.
Because you let it go where it pleases, as it pleases,
as much as you wish. When it is out, you are ready.
This one boy I ask humbly, I feel, you exclude.
For if foul thought and senseless passion drives
you, wretch, to such a crime
that you plan in your mind treason against me,
Then you will have a miserable and ill fate.
Because with feet tied together you will be run
through your backdoor with mullets and radishes.
I’ll push your shit in and stuff your face--
Aurelius, you cocksucker; Furius, you little bitch--
since you think that my little poems
have gone soft and I must not be too upright!
It’s true; the devoted poet should stand erect
in his values, but not necessarily in his little
poems, which are truly witty and charming
when they're a little soft, and not too stiff,
but can still cause a little tingling--
I don't just mean for youth, but for hairy men
who can't make their own loins stand upright!
You! You read about my "many kisses"
and doubt I'm fully a man?
I’ll push your shit in and stuff your face.
O Cologna, you wish to play on the long bridge
and are ready to jump, but you are weary of the awkward
legs of a little bridge standing on second-hand planks,
lest it go facing upward and settle in the deep swamp:
out of your lust, may the bridge be good for you,
this bridge on which even the rites of Salisubsalus might be undertaken;
so grant me this favor of the greatest laughter, Cologna.
I want a certain townsman of mine to go
plunging headfirst into the mud,
or rather where the lake of the stinking swamp is a blackish-blue hole,
as nearly bottomless as possible.
The man is well nigh witless, and he doesn't sense so well
as a two-year-old boy in the dandling forearm of his sleeping father.
Though he has for a wife a young woman in the freshest flower,
(and the young woman, friskier than a tender little bird,
must be guarded from clusters of very dark grapes),
he lets her play as she pleases; he doesn't care a hair,
and he doesn't rouse himself from his lethargy on his own behalf. But he lies
just like an alder tree in a ditch, an alder tree hamstrung by a Ligmian axe,
sensing everything just as well as if it didn't exist at all.
Such a clod as this one of mine sees nothing and hears nothing,
and he himself doesn't even know whether he exists.
Now I want to send him face down from your bridge,
if that can arouse his dull senility,
and leave his helpless mind in the heavy slime
as a she-mule leaves her iron sandal behind in a glutinous pit.
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
Aurelius, father of hungers,
not only of these but of however many have ever been,
or are, or will be throughout the years:
you want to sleep with my boy.
Not secretly: for you\'re always with him, you joke around together,
attached to his side you try everything.
For although you plot against me,
I'll stick it to you first, my dick in your mouth.
Still, if that were enough, I would keep my peace;
I take offense now at this, that the boy will learn
from you (ah, me!) to hunger and thirst.
On account of which lay off, while you can do so chastely,
lest you should reach your end, but with a dick in your mouth.
That Suffenus, Varius, whom you know well,
That man is charming, and witty, and sophisticated,
And the same man makes the most by far very many verses of poetry.
I think that either 10,000 or more verses
Have been written by that man, as is common in palimpsest
Having been jotted down there are: royal papers (expensive papyri), new books,
New knobs, red straps, scroll covers,
All things having been ruled with lead and smoothed by pumice.
When you read this, that good and sophisticated
Suffenus merely a goatherder or a ditchdigger
On the contrary seems: he differs and changes so much.
What are we to think that this is? He who recently seemed a clever man
Or if anything is more clever than this thing
That same man is more witless than the dull countryside,
As soon as he has undertaken a poem, nor is that same man
Ever equally as happy as when he writes the poem:
So much he rejoices in himself and so much he himself admires at himself
Clearly we are all deceived in the same way, nor is there anyone
Whom you could see not to be Suffenus in some thing.
To each one of us one's own mistakes have been assigned;
but we do not see the knapsack which is on our back.
Furius, you who have neither a servant nor a moneychest,
neither a bedbug nor a spider-web nor a fire,
but have a father and step-mother,
whose teeth even are able to eat hard rock:
things are sweet to you, with your father,
and with the tough wife of your father.
Do not be amazed: for you are all well,
you digest well, you fear nothing -
not fires, not severe ruin,
not wicked deeds, not plots of poison,
nor other dangerous accidents.
And you have bodies drier than horn,
or whatever is drier than horn;
and they are accustomed to both cold and hunger.
Why then is everything not well and blessed for you?
Sweat also is absent from you, and saliva,
and mucus and other bad nasal emissions.
To this cleanliness add more cleanliness,
because you have an anus more pure than a saltcellar,
nor in the entire year do you defecate ten times,
and even then it is more solid than a bean or pebble -
if you rubbed it with your hands,
you wouldn't even be able to make your hands dirty.
These advantages are so beautiful, Furius,
don't spurn them or think them worthless,
and stop begging the hundred sesterces as you are accustomed to:
for you are blessed enough.
O you who are the youthful flower of the Juventius family,
not only of these, but however many either were
of after this will be born in later years,
I would prefer you to give wealth to that Midas
who has neither servant nor money-box,
than you allow yourself like this to be loved by that guy
"Who? Is he not good-looking?" you ask. He is.
But to that good-looking man belong neither servant nor money-box.
Throw it away and make light of this as much as you want,
but nevertheless that man has neither servant nor money-box.
Thallus, you faggot, softer than rabbitfur,
or goosedown, or a sweet little earlobe,
or an old man's listless dick, lying in cobwebs and neglect.
And yet, when the full moon shows the other guests starting to nod and yawn,
you're grabbier than a plunging hurricane.
Give me back my housecoat, which you pounced on,
and my good Spanish flax table napkins, and the painted boxwood writing tablets,
which you keep on display, jerk, like they were heirlooms,
unstick them from your claws and give them back
or I'll use a whip to scribble some really embarrassing lines,
hot as the iron that brands disgrace on a common thief,
on your woolsoft sides and dainty little hands.
You'll get excited in a brand new way, your head will spin
like a boat caught out on the open sea when the winds go mad.
Furius, your family's cottage
stands neither against the gusts
from the south nor west, nor
from fierce Boreas nor Apheliota.
No, it stands against fifteen
grand and two hundred sesterces.
O harsh wind and dreadful!
O servant boy of the old Falernian wine,
pour more bitter cups for me,
as the law of the Postumia mistress (who is)
drunker than the drunk wine orders.
O waters, go away to that place where it pleases you,
the ruin (destruction) of wine, and depart (go) to
the party-poopers (conservative). This is pure Bacchus.
Friends of Piso, unprofitable staff,
with light knapsacks ready & unencumbered,
the best Veranus & you my Fabullus,
what do you make of things? Is it not enough
that you endure your hunger with that flat & cold wine?
Does it show in the account books anything of small profit
that has been paid out, as I chalk up what was paid out
by me, who followed my leader, as small profit?
O Memmius, for a long time you made me, supine, suck dick
well & also slowly with that whole shaft.
But, as far as I can tell, you all were in the same
situation: for you were stuffed with a penis no less
erect. Seek noble friends!
And yet to you let the gods & goddesses give many
bad things, disgraces of Romulus & Remus.
Who is able to see this, who is able to endure it
Except someone who is shameless and a glutton and a gambler,
Mamurra has what the province of Gaul
Used to have in value as well as that of farthest Britain?
Cinaedus* Romulus, will you see these things and put up with them?
And now that (man) thinks he is better than everyone and is overflowing
And he will walk through everyone's bedroom,
As a white dove or Adoneus**?
Cinaedus Romulus, will you see these things and put up with them?
You are shameless and a glutton and a gambler.
Is it for this reason, unique commander***,
You were on that farthest island of the west****
So that he could gobble up everything 200 and 300 times?
What else is this except for wicked liberality?
First squandered was his good inheritance,
Second the plunder from the Black Sea, third
That of Spain, which the gold-bearing Tagus (river) knows:
Now there is fear in Gaul and Britain.
Why do you nurture this wickedness? What is this man able to do
Besides devour an oily inheritance?
Is it for this reason everything extravagent in the city
Has been destroyed, father-in-law***** and son-in-law******?
* - A complicated insulting term referring to sexual immorality and a willingness to do anything for a little profit.
** - Adoneus was Venus's (Aphrodite's) lover.
*** - Commander refers to Julius Caesar.
**** - Farthest island of the west refers to Britain
***** - Refers to Julius Caesar
****** - Refers to Pompey, as well as his former relationship with Julius Caesar
Alfenus, thoughtless and deceitful to your congenial pals,
Have you no pity whatsoever, hardheart, for your beloved friend?
Don't you now hesitate to betray me, to mislead me, you rogue?
Nor are the wicked deeds of treacherous men pleasing to the gods.
Like this deed you overlook: deserting me here wretched in my woes.
What are men to do? Alas! Tell me! Or in whom should they place trust?
You, indeed unjust, kept ordering me to entrust my soul,
Leading me on into friendship as if everything were fine.
You, that same person, now withdraw yourself, entrusting to the winds
All of your words, all of your deeds, carried away nebulously.
Even if you choose to forget, mindful are the gods, even Faith,
Who will make damn sure that you regret your deeds afterwards, my friend.
Sirmio, jewel of islands and of peninsulas,
Whatever each Neptune carries
In the stagnant clear waters and in the vast sea,
How gladly and how happy I see you,
Scarcely myself believing myself that I have left behind
Thynia and the Bithynian fields and that I see you in safety.
O what is more blessed than cares freed,
When the mind puts down its burden,
And we tired from foreign labor come
To our hearth and rest in a longed for bed?
This is that which is the one thing for such great labors.
Greetings, O beautiful Sirmio, and rejoice in your master rejoicing;
And you, O Lydian waves of the lake,
Laugh whatever there is of laughter at home.
I beg you, my sweet, my Ipsitilla,
my darling, my sophisticated beauty,
summon me to a midday assignation;
and, if you're willing, do me one big favor:
don't let another client shoot the door bolt,
and don't decide to suddenly go cruising,
but stay at home & get yourself all ready
for nine - yes, nine - successive copulations!
Honestly, if you want it, give the order:
I've eaten, and I'm sated, supinated!
My prick is poking through my cloak and tunic.
O greatest of thieves skulking about the bathouses,
The father, Vibennius, and Vibennius Junior, the catamite son
(For dad is the one with the more sordid thieving hand,
While sonny boy is busy peddling his voracious fundament):
Why don't you both get the hell out of here and go to the devil?
Since the thieveries of the father are common knowledge
And you, son, couldn't sell that hairy ass of yours for a penny.
In the custody of Diana we are
the pure boys and girls:
The boys and girls
sing to Diana
O Latonia, the great
offspring of the greatest Jupiter.
whom the mother gave birth
near a Delian olive tree
so you could be the mistress of the mountains
and of the flourishing woods
and of the secluded wooded pasture
and of the resounding river:
you Lucina Iuno are said to be
by a women in labor
to be the powerful Trivia
and Luna with bastard light
in your monthly course goddess
measuring your annual journey
you fill the rustic homes of the farmer
with good produce
may you be holy by whatever name pleases
you and may you preserve the family of
Romulus as you are accustomed
of good help long ago.
I would like you, papyrus,
to tell Caecilius, the love poet, my friend
to come to Verona, leaving
the walls of New Comum and the Larian shore
for I wish him to receive
certain thoughts of a friend of his and mine
therefore if he is wise, he will eat up the road
although a dazzling girl calls him
back a thousand times as he leaves and
flinging both arms around his neck begs that Caecilius remain.
That's the girl who, if what's reported to me is true,
now perishes through uncontrollable love:
for when she reads his
unfinished "Mistress of Dindymus", from that time fires
have been eating the marrow of the poor girl.
I forgive you, girl more learned than Sappho's
muse: for the Great Mother of Caecilius
is elegantly underway.
Annales of Volusis, shitty papers,
discharged a vow on behalf on my girl
for she vowed to the holy Venus and Cupid
that if I had returned myself
and if I had stop hurling vicous iambs (verses)
she would give the most superior writing of the
worst poet to the slow footed God
to be burned on unfortunate wood
And the worst girl sees herself
to vow this all in good fun with the Gods
Now o goddess born into the blue sea
who is holy in Idalium and Urium
and you who are worshipped at Ancona
and full of reeds Cnidus and Golgi
and Durrachium the shop of the Adriatic
enter the vow as recieved and discharged
if it is not uncharming nor is unattractive
and you meanwhile come in flames
full of countryside and courseness
Annales of Vouluisis, crapped on paper.
O salacious tavern and you comrades,
at the ninth pillar from the felt-capped brothers,
you think that you alone have penises,
that you alone are permitted to have sex with
however many girls there are and think the rest he-goats?
Or, because 100 (or 200?) of you stupids sit in a line,
you think that I would not dare to force you 200 sitters together
to perform oral sex on me?
But now think: I will draw dicks all over the front of your tavern.
For that girl, who fled from my lap,
who I loved as much as no one will love a girl,
on behalf of whom many battles were fought,
sits there. All the good and rich men are making love to this girl,
and, indeed, rather unsuitably, all you puny alley-way adulterers;
you love one beyond all, one of the hairy ones.
son of the cave-dwelling Celtiberians,
Egnatius, whose good is marked by a shady beard,
and who scours his teeth with Iberian piss.
Things are bad for your Catullus, Cornificius,
Things are bad, by Hercules, and painfully so,
and more and more so as days and hours pass.
With what word of comfort, which is the least
and the easiest, have you comforted him?
I am angry with you. Is this how you treat my love?
Give me a tiny bit of comfort,
sadder than the tears of Simonideus.
Egnatius, because he has bright white teeth,
always smiles: If someone comes to the defendant's
bench, when the speaker arouses weeping,
he grins; If there is weeping at the funeral pyre of
a dutiful son, when the bereaved mother laments her only son,
he grins. Whatever it is, wherever he is,
whatever he is doing, he grins: he has this disease,
neither elegant, as I think, nor refined.
Therefore I must warn you, my good Egnatius.
If you were a city man or a Sabine or a Tiburnan
or a thrifty Umbrian or a fat Etruscan
or a swarthy or toothy Lanuvian or
a Transpadane, to touch on my own people as well,
or anyone you like who cleans his teeth with clean water,
I still should not want you to smile on all occasions:
for nothing is more silly than a silly smile.
Now you are a Celtiberian: in the land of Celtiberia,
whatever each man has urinated, with this he is accustomed
in the morning to rub his teeth and gums until they are red,
so that the more polished those teeth of yours are,
the more urine they proclaim you to have drunk.
What perverse purpose, poor little Ravidus,
Hurls you headlong onto my iambics?
Which god – ill-invoked by you – prepares
To start for you a crazy brawl?
Just so you can become a topic of popular gossip?
What do you want? To become famous any old way?
You will, since you decided to fall for my love
At the risk of an everlasting punishment.
Ameana, the well-worn prostitute,
demanded the whole 10,000 from me
this girl with the ugly nose,
friend of the indebted man of Formianus.
Relatives, to whom the girl is of concern,
call together doctors and friends:
the girl is not sane, nor is she accustomed to ask
for bronze reflective of her looks.
Notes:
"well-worn prostitute": lit. a girl tired-out by sex (puella defututa could also mean "well fucked girl", beacuse while defututa literally means worn out by sex, it has more implications taken in context of the time, during which it was used by the young in the same manner modern Americans use the word "fuck".)
Ref. to 10,000 ses. that Ameana presumably charged Catullus for her services.
"ugly nose": turpiculo naso, turpiculo being in the diminuitive, might I add, and meaning "indecent".. ugly seems to be the better english word choice, though.
"indebted man...": ref. to Mammura, indebted from the latin decoctorislit. cooked-out.
"Relatives..... call...": convocate is an imperative.. someone in our 351 class suggested "call 911!" as a more modern translation but I chose to keep it's ancient intergity..
A problem exists, however, with the last 2 lines, which translates more literally to:
the girl is not sane, nor to ask
is she accustomed: what she looks like of the mirror.
However, the poem does not flow in english like it does in latin with the break after rogare, thus I have fixed the english syntax problems in my translation. To comment on my changes in the last line, I believe Catullus meant to say that she was not accustomed to asking for what she is really worth... that is to say, bluntly, she's too ugly to pay 10,000 ses. for, someone should hand that girl a mirror! My use of 'reflective bronze' in the last line refers to both a mirror and monetary compensation.
Come here, nasty words, so many I can hardly
tell where you all came from.
That ugly slut thinks I'm a joke
and refuses to give us back
the poems, can you believe this shit?
Lets hunt her down , and demand them back!
Who is she, you ask? That one, who you see
strutting around, with ugly clown lips,
laughing like a pesky French poodle.
Surround her, ask for them again!
"Rotten slut, give my poems back!
Give 'em back, rotten slut, the poems!"
Doesn't give a shit? Oh, crap. Whorehouse.
or if anything's worse, you're it.
But I've not had enough thinking about this.
If nothing else, lets make that
pinched bitch turn red-faced.
All together shout, once more, louder:
"Rotten slut, give my poems back!
Give 'em back, rotten slut, the poems!"
But nothing helps, nothing moves her.
A change in your methods is cool,
if you can get anything more done.
"Sweet thing, give my poems back!"
Hello, girl, neither with the smallest nose,
Nor with pretty feet nor with black little eyes
Nor with long fingers nor with dry lips
Nor clearly with a very refined tongue.
Girl/friend of the spendthrift from Formiae,
Does the province report that you are beautiful?
Is our Lesbia compared with you?
O tasteless and crude age!
Country place of mine, whether Sabine or Tiburtine
(for they claim you to be Tiburtine, those who do not feel like
offending Catullus: yet those who like to offend him,
wager anything that you are Sabine),
but whether Sabine or more truly Tiburtine,
I was glad to be at your suburban hearth.
I coughed an awful cough from my chest
which my belly had given me, not undeservingly,
while I was after sumptuous dinners.
For as I wanted to be Sestius's dinner companion
I read a speech full of poison and plague
against the candidate Antius,
At this point a chilling cold and frequent cough shook me
continually until I fled into your bosom
and I restored myself by rest and nettle.
Wherefore, having been restored, I offer you most grateful thanks
because my sin you did not punish.
And now I am quite happy, if I touch the horrible works
of Sestius, that the cold bring a chill and a cough
not to me but to Sestius himself;
he only invites me when I have read a bad book.
Septimius, holding his love Acme
in his arms, said:"My Acme,
unless I love you to distraction and hereafter
am prepared to love you continually throughout the years
as much as he who can love you most,
may I alone in Libya and torrid India
meet a grey-eyed lion."
As he said this, Cupid sneezed approval on
the left as before on the right.
And Acme, gently bending back her head
and having kissed the eyes intoxicated
with love, of the sweet boy with those rosy lips,
said: "In this way, my dear Septimius,
my life, let us serve forever this one master,
as a flame much greater and keener
burns in my tender limbs."
As she said this, Cupid sneezed approval
on the left as before on the right.
Now having set out with good omens they
love and are loved with mutual feelings.
Poor little Septimius prefers his one Acme
to all the Syrias and Britains:
the faithful Acme takes delight
and pleasure in her one Septimius.
Who has seen any more blessed men,
who a more auspicious Cupid?
Now spring brings back unchilled warmth,
now the rage of the ecquinoctial sky
grows silent with the pleasant breezes of the west wind.
The Phrygian fields should be quitted, Catullus,
& the fertile territory of sweltering Iznik:
let us fly to the bright cities of Asia.
Now the mind trembling in anticipation yearns to roam,
now the happy feet grow strong in their pastime.
Be well, o sweet company of friends,
who having wandered far from home together
return in different ways to a route headed in a different direction.
Porcius and Socration, the two left hands
of Piso, the scab and hunger of the universe,
did that prick place you before
my little Veranius and Fabulous?
You have dinner parties sumptuously and lavishly
during the day, and [yet] my buddies
are seeking invitations on street corners?
Juventius, if I could play at kissing
your honeyed eyes as often as I wished to,
300,000 games would not exhaust me;
never could I be satisfied or sated,
although the total of our osculations
were greater than the ears of grain at harvest.
Most eloquent of the descendants of Romulus,
As many as there are and however many there have been, Marcus Tullius,
And however many there will be in the years to come
Catullus drives the greatest thanks to you
The least poet of all gives
As much the least poet of all,
As you are the best patron of all.
O Licinius, we at leisure have played
many things on my boards,
as we agreed to be racy:
and both of us writing small verses
were playing with a meter just here just there,
giving back mutual words through joke and wine.
And from there inflamed I have gone away
from your pleasantness, Licinius, and clever talks,
and as a result neither food helps my misery
nor sleep quietly covers my eyes,
but untamed I as a result might turn with total fury,
desiring to see the light,
so that I might speak with you at the same time I might be with you.
But afterwards the half-dead limbs tired by labor
were lying on a small couch,
delightful jewel, I make this poem for you,
from which you clearly see my grief.
We beg, now beware of being bold and
beware of showing contempt for our prayers,
lest Nemesis demands punishments from you.
She is a violent goddess: You will beware of offending her.
That man seems to me to be equal to a god,
That man, if it is right to say, seems to surpass the gods,
who sitting opposite to you repeatedly looks at you
and hears
your sweet laughter, something which robs miserable me
of all feelings: for as soon as I look
at you, Lesbia, no voice remains
in my mouth.
But the tongue is paralyzed, a fine fire
spreads down through my limbs, the ears ring with their
very own sound, my eyes veiled
in a double darkness.
Idleness, Catullus, is your trouble;
idleness is what delights you and moves you to passion;
idleness has proved ere now the ruin of kings and
prosperous cities.
What is it, Catullus? Why do you delay in dying?
That pimple, Nonius, sits in the magistrate's chair;
Vatinius perjures himself by his 'consulship'!
What is it, Catullus? Why do you delay in dying?
I laughed at some guy from the crowd, when my friend
Calvus had excellently laid out the charges against Vatinius;
raising his hands in wonder, he said this, 'My God, such
A little pip - and it squeaks!'
Otho’s head is quite tiny,
and its owner’s legs loutishly unclean,
soft and delicate is Libo’s farting:
if not with all that, then let me displease you
with Sufficio, old age renewed...
again let my worthless iambics
rile you, our one and only general.
We implore you - if perchance it's no trouble -
to point out just where your Shady Nook is.
We've looked for you at the racetracks (both Bijou
and CircMax), checked out all the bookstores, even
cased the temple sacred to Jove Most High.
Likewise, my friend, I collared all the femettes
strolling in Pompey's Portico--but not
one of those innocents batted an eye.
"Give him back!" (that's how I accosted them)
"Give me Camerius, you wicked little maids!"
One of them, making a clean breast of it, said:
"C'm åere yourself: he's hiding--between my pink tits!"
To put up with you now is Ye Labor of Hercules,
you keep your distance with such disdain, dear friend!
Tell us your schedule (when and where), broadcast it
boldly, trust me. Step into the Light of Day!
The Peaches ån' Cream Girls are keeping you, right?
If you keep your tongue sealed up in your mouth,
you'll waste all the tasty fruits of love -
Venus Verbosa likes lots of gossip!
Or, if you want, you can keep your hatch latched,
so long as I get a load of you love!
Oh what a funny thing, Cato, and a jest,
and worthy of your laughter and ears!
Laugh as much as you love Catullus, Cato:
the thing is funny and very much a joke.
I just caught a little boy thrusting away
into a girl; I banged him, if it please Dione,
with my boner like a spear.
Everything is turning out well for those disgraceful Cinaedii*
Caesar and Mamurra** the pathicus*
No wonder: the stains are equal for both of them,
But one is from the city and the other is from Formia,
And they are so ingrained that they cannot be washed out:
They are diseased equally, and both are twins,
Both are educated in one little bed,
Nor is the latter a more gluttinous adulterer than the former;
They are allied rivals even for little girls.
Everything is turning out well for those disgraceful Cinaedii*.
* - Cinaedus (in the plural form, Cinaedii) and pathicus are both vulgar and insulting words that refer to sexually perverted individuals.
** - Mamurra was a crony of Julius Caesar whose political history is reviewed by Catullus in Carmen 29.
Caelius, our Lesbia, that Lesbia,
that same Lesbia, whom Catullus loved
more than himself and more than all his own,
now loiters at the cross-roads and in the backstreets
ready to toss-off the grandsons of the brave Remus.
Rufa of Bologna and Rufulus screw:
she's the wife of Menenus, quite often whom you
catch snatching her dinner from pyres of the dead
chasing up all fallen pieces of bread.
The unshaven cremator soon beats her head.
Surely a lioness from the African mountains
or barking Scylla didn't beget you from the lowest part of her loins,
you of such pitiless, vile spirit that you hold in contempt
the voice of a supplicant in his last and final despair,
ah, you of too cruel heart?
O, inhabitant of the mountain of Helicon, son of
Urania, who seize a dainty young woman and carry her off to
a man, o Hymenaeus, Hymen! o Hymenaeus Hymen! Crown your
temples with flowers, take your flame-colored veil, pleasant
with fragrant marjoram, and come over here, wearing a
reddish yellow slipper on a snow-white foot! And having been
roused from sleep on a cheerful day, singing wedding songs
in a high-pitched voice, strike the ground with your feet,
and shake the pinewood marriage-torch with your hand! Good
virgin Junia dons the veil for Manius with a good omen, like
Venus, who dwells in Idalium, as she came to Paris, the
Phrygian judge. And she is just like an Asian myrtle tree
shining forth with small, flowery branches, which the wood
nymphs nurture with dewy moisture, as amusement for
themselves. Therefore come, making an approach over here,
and continue, leaving behind the Aonian caves of the
Thespian rock, the caves which the nymph Aganippe makes wet
as she cools them from above. And call the mistress,
desirous of her new husband, home, as you bind their minds
with love, like wandering ivy clinging to a tree in a
tangle! Likewise, you unmarried virgins, whose own wedding
day, as well, is coming soon, act in the right and proper
way, and sing, “O Hymenaeus Hymen! o Hymenaeus Hymen,” in
order that the leader of good Venus, the one who conjoins
good love, might make his approach over here more gladly
when he hears himself being called to the task. Which god is
more to be sought by lovers who are loved? Which of the gods
will people look after the more, o Hymenaeus Hymen, o
Hymenaeus Hymen? Sex can seize nothing of benefit without
you, because a good reputation demonstrates one’s goodness,
but sex can do this when you are willing. Who would dare be
compared to this god? Without you, no family can give
children, and no parent can rely on his offspring, but he
can when you are willing. Who would dare be compared to this
god? A land that lacked your holy rites would not be able to
give guardians to its borders: but it would if you were
willing. Who would dare be compared to this god? Open the
bars of the door. There is a young woman. Do you see how the
marriage torches shake their fiery locks? ....A natural
sense of shame may delay the bride. Nevertheless, hearing
her shame the more, she weeps because she must go. Stop
crying, Junia. In your case, there is no danger that a
prettier woman has seen the rising light of day. Such a
hyacinth-colored flower usually stands in the multicolored
little garden of a wealthy lord. But you are dallying, and
the day is ending. Please go forth as the bride. Please
advance as the bride, if it seems proper at this time, and
hear our words. See? The wedding torches shake their golden
locks: please advance as the bride. Your husband is not
fickle; not devoted to a bad mistress, he does not pursue
indecent scandals, and he won’t want to sleep apart from
your dainty little breasts; but just as a supple vine
entwines with trees planted nearby, he will become entangled
in your embrace. But the day is ending. Please go forth as
the bride. O marriage bed, which for everyone... How
numerous the pleasures of the ivory-footed marriage bed come
to your husband, which, on a restless night, and in the
middle of the day, may he enjoy! But the day is ending;
please go forth as the bride. Boys, raise the wedding-
torches; I see the flame-colored veil coming. Go and sing in
unison, in the right and proper way: “Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus,
yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus!” Lest the ribald Fescennine jesting
be silent for a long time, and the groom’s catamite refuse
nuts to boys as he hears about abandoned love. Give nuts to
the boys, lazy catamite! You have played with nuts long
enough: now it pleases Hymenaeus to be of service. Catamite,
give nuts. You considered farm managers’ wives unworthy of
your attention, today and yesterday. Now your hairdresser
shaves your beard. O wretched, wretched catamite, give nuts!
Anointed groom, you will be criticized for keeping away from
your bald, effeminate slaves, but keep away from them. Yo!
Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! We know that these
peccadilloes (which are permitted to you) are the only ones
you have known, but they are not permitted to a married man.
Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! Wife, beware
lest you deny the things that both you and your husband
seek, lest he go to seek them from elsewhere. Yo! Hymen
Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! Behold how powerful and
wealthy your husband’s house is, which is in your interest:
allow it to be of service to you (Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus, yo!
Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus!) until old white-haired womanhood,
nodding her tremulous head, nods assent to everything for
everyone. Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! With
a good omen, carry your gold-colored little feet over the
threshold, and go beneath the door of polished wood. Yo!
Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! Look inside in
order that your husband, reclining in his crimson bed, might
be completely intent on you. Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo!
Hymen Hymenaeus! A flame burns no less ardently in his
innermost heart than in yours, but secretly, even more so.
Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! Young man,
give your smooth little arm to the maiden; let her visit her
husband’s bed now. Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus, yo! Yo! Hymen
Hymenaeus! You good women, well known by your aged husbands,
array the maiden on her marriage bed. Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus,
yo! Yo! Hymen Hymenaeus! You may come now, bridegroom: your
wife is in the marriage chamber, and her countenance is
flowery and radiant, like the white chamomile or the red
poppy. But (thus may the gods help me) you are no less
handsome, o bridegroom, and Venus is not indifferent to you.
But the day is ending. Proceed, and do not dally. You have
not waited long; now you are coming. May good Venus be of
help to you, since what you desire you desire openly, and
you do not conceal your good love. Let him who wishes to
count the many thousands of your love-plays first calculate
the amount of sand in Africa and the number of twinkling
stars! Play as you like, and within a short time, produce
children. It isn’t fitting for an old name to be without
children, but it is fitting for them to be engendered from
the same family. I want Torquatus to laugh sweetly, with a
half-open lip, as, from his mother’s lap, he stretches out
his delicate hand to his father. May he be like his father
Manlius, and easily recognized by everyone who is unknowing,
and may he declare the sexual fidelity of his mother by
mouth! May the virtue from his good mother prove the
excellence of his family, just as the peerless flame remains
for Telemachus from his excellent mother, Penelope. Close
the doors of the marriage chamber, young ladies: we have
played enough. But, good newlyweds, live well and spend your
vigorous youth in incessant conjugal activity!
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
The evening star is here, young men, so rise: the evening star
at last brings heaven its long-awaited bodies of light.
Now it is time to rise, time to quit the well stocked tables.
Now a young maiden will come; the wedding refrain will be sung.
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
You maidens, do you see the young men? Rise to face them;
the Night-bringer no doubt reveals Oetean fires.
No doubt but this is true: do you see how nimbly they have sprung forth?
They haven't sprung forth without good cause; we must outdo what they will sing.
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
An easy victory palm has not been furnished us, my friends, for look:
the maidens search their memories for things they have rehearsed.
They don't rehearse in vain: they hold what is worth remembering;
and this is no wonder, for they are deep at work with the whole of their minds.
But with one thing we've divided our minds, with another, divided our ears;
hence, by law, we'll be defeated: victory loves concern.
Therefore turn at least your minds around now;
now they'll begin to speak, and now we'll be pressed to answer.
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
Evening star, what heavenly body is borne more savagely through the sky?
You, who can tear a daughter away from her mother's embrace,
tear a daughter away from a mother's embrace! though she holds fast,
and give the chaste girl to a young man on fire!
What greater cruelty do invaders inflict when a city has been taken?
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
Evening star, what heavenly body shines more delightfully in the sky?
O you, who strengthen with your flame a wedding pledged,
which the men and parents have fixed in place beforehand,
they did not join bride and groom before your blaze carried itself away.
What thing more desired do the gods give at a happy hour?
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
My friends, the Evening Star has taken a maiden away from us...
...Evening Star, the watchman always wakes at your arrival,
thieves lurk in the night, and you often catch them as you return,
like the watchman, by the pseudonym of the Dawn.
But maidens like to carp at you with disingenuous complaint.
Why then, if they complain, do they silently seek you out?
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
Just as it is that a flower, unknown to the livestock,
is born secluded within gardens enclosed, by no plow uprooted,
a flower which the breezes caress, the sun strengthens, the rain nurtures:
many boys and many girls have desired it.
So it is that a young woman, as long as she remains untouched, so long she is dear to her people;
but when she has lost her chaste flower, her body besmirched,
she remains neither pleasant for boys nor dear to girls.
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
Just as it is that an unsupported vine which is born in a naked field
never lifts itself up and never rears a succulent bunch of grapes,
but bending its frail body downward with its weight toward the ground,
it just now touches with its root the tip of its whiplike shoot:
no farmers have tilled it, and no bullocks have tilled it.
But if perchance the same vine has been joined together with an elm as its husband,
many farmers have tilled it, and many bullocks have tilled it.
So it is that a young woman, while she remains untouched, and while she ages unkempt,
when she has gained marriage with one of equal rank when the time is ripe,
she is more dear to her husband and less often hated by her father.
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
And you, young woman, do not resist such a husband!
It isn't just to resist him to whom your father has handed you down;
you must obey your father along with your mother. Your virginity is not completely yours;
it is in part your parents'; a third has been given to your father,
a third has been given to your mother, and only a third is yours.
Do not resist them who gave their son-in-law their own rights over you,
along with your dowry.
Hymenaeus Hymen, come! O Hymen Hymenaeus!
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
Over deep seas Attis in His fast boat bourne,
so that on swift foot He eagerly could reach the Phrygian forest
and approach the shaded, wreathed by trees places of the Goddess,
roused then by a wild frenzy, raving with the spirits,
He plucked out there on the spot(1) the weights with a sharp flint,
and so when She sensed (Her Self being without) Her disposed-off
body parts, without manhood,
indeed, staining the soil with fresh blood,
She quickly with snow-white hands grabbed the light drum,
Your drum, Cybebe, Your rites, Mother,
and beating the hollow bull's hides with tender fingers,
She dared to sing this tremulously to Her Companions:
"Drive on, go, Gallae, to Cybele's high woods together,
go together, Dindymenian Domina's roving cattle,
Who like exiles seek to find foreign places,
(and) as My following have imitated Me - Companians to Me
with Me as Leader.
You've endured the wild sea and its deadly dangers
and emasculated the body out of immense hatred of Venus.
Amuse the Mistress with Your headlong tresspasses.
Let's not tarry any longer, go together, follow Me
to Cybebe's Phrygian House, to the Phrygian woods of the Goddess,
where cymbals make their clashing sound, where drums resonate,
where the Phrygian piper plays melancholically the curved reed,
where the ivy-wearing Maenads shake Their heads violently,
where They do Their offerings wailingly,
where that roving crowd is used to flutter about for the Goddess,
for Whom it's right that We speed up the quick three-step dance."
Together with the Companians this Attis sang, the imitation-woman.
Suddenly the Celebrants start wailing with oscillating tongues,
promptly the drum bangs in return, the cymbals resound with a ring.
To green Ida the swift Chorus goes in hot haste.
In rapture, out of breath and unsettled She walks on more dead than alive.
While banging Her drum through the shadowy woods Attis is Leader.
Just like an untamed heifer that tries to avoid the burden of the yoke,
the wild Gallae follow the swift-footed Leader.
Therefore, as soon as They reached (3) Cybebe's House,
They out of enormous exertion go to sleep without having eaten.
Because of this trying exertion slothful Sleep covers the eyes.
Their minds at pleasant repose the wild rapture passes off.
But as the gold-faced Sun with His shining eyes
brightened the immaculate sky, the hard ground, the wild sea
and dispelled the night's shadows with His sprightly horses,
Sleep left wide-awake Attis quickly forgetting all past exertion.
Into fearful bosom the Goddess of all Gods and Goddesses(3)
received Her back.
So after pleasant repose without the wild frenzy
and likewise Her heart Attis recollected Her actions,
and saw without all that with clear mind and where She'd been,
at Her wit's end full of regret ran to the waters.
There Her eyes full of tears beholding the vast sea
the sad One(4) addressed Her Country with a voice so wretchedly:
"Country, O Creatress of Me, O My Country, Birthgiver,
I such a wretch forsaking masters like fugitive
slaves do, ran away to the woods of Ida,
to be close to the snow and the ice-cold lairs of wild animals
and go in rapture to all their hiding places,
where somewhere You, Country, after all can also be found, I imagine ?
The same poplars long to direct their sharp tops to You,
[or: The same piercing eyes long to direct them to You,]
intend to keep aloof from wild frenzy, as long as life is short.
Weren't I driven(2) from My home to these far away woods ?
Country, won't I be absent from good people, from friends and parents ?
Absent from the forum, the wrestling arena, the running course and
the gymnasia ?
Wretched ah wretched, it's forever to be deplored, Soul.
Truely, what do I look like, aren't I therefore damned ?
Am I a woman, a youth, a husband-to-be, a boy ?
I was in top form, the attraction of the wrestling school:
many people frequently visited Me, Many kept Their houses cool for Me,
My house was adorned with garlands for Me,
people stood up for Me, where a seat faced the Sun rise.
Am I now driven(2) to be a servant of gods(5) and Cybele's slave ?
Am I to be(6) a Maenad, am I to play that part, to be a sterile man ?
Am I to live in the cold, snow-coated place of green Ida ?
Am I to spend My life under the high mountain tops of Phrygia,
where the hind is a forest dweller, where the boar is a wood rover ?
What I've done, distresses Me now, now I'm sorry."
When She made a quick loud noise with Her rose lips, She left,
the new messenger addressing Her Self to the ears of the gods.
Then, as Cybele takes(7) the joined yokes off the lions
and incites the hostile animal on the left, thus She speaks:
"Go," She says,"go, wild one, make this One like crazy,
make it so, that She through an attack of frenzy runs back to the woods,
She Who so very fearlessly wishes to flee at My command.
Go, beat(2) Her skin with your tail, She must be exposed to your chastenings,
make it so, that the whole place resounds of your thundering roaring,
shake your ruddy mane, wild one, with your muscular neck."
This asserts dangerous Cybebe and loosens the yokes with Her hand.
The wild animal itself urging itself takes off with all its courage,
it wades, hullabaloos, breaks the underbrush on unsteady foot,
but as it nears the damp bright-white parts of the beach
and sees the tender Attis near the marble (of the) sea,
it makes its attack. That crazed One, She flees into the wild woods.
There for always and the whole space of Her life She was a Servant.
Goddess, great Goddess, Cybebe, Goddess, Domina of Dindymon,
may all Your(8) Fury be far away from Me, Mistress, and far from home.
Drive Others frantic, drive Others into rapture.
[(1) In the Latin version of Verse 5 it says "ili", that should be "illi" = "there on the stop".]
[(2) "tetigere" ?! Shouldn't that be "tetigunt" ?
Likewise "ferar" ... "feror", "ferat" ... "fert" ?
Likewise "caeda" ... "caede" ?]
[(3) "Pasitheia" = "Pas + Théia". Plural of "Théion" = "a divine being". "Pas"= "All".]
[(4) "maestast" = "maesta"+ "est". Likewise: "figurast" = "figura" + "est"]
[(5) "deum" like "equum" is a genitive masculine plural.]
[(6) Like in Greek, future tense also has an obligatory meaning: must, ought to, am to.]
[(7) Here Catullus switches to present tense. I maintained this (?) quirk of His.]
[(8) "tuos" should be "tuus", Catullus did that on purpose. Here is used the Greek suffix of the nominative masculine singular. Cf. "Cybeles" and "Cybebes": here with Greek suffix of the genitive feminine singular.]
The pine trees erstwhile grown on Mt. Pelion's summit are
said to have floated on Neptune's clear waves to Phasis,
Aeëtean land, when the fittest young men, the glory of
Argive manpower, dared travel over the sea's briny waters on
a rapidly moving ship as they swept the deep blue expanse
with wooden oars, because they hoped to steal the Golden
Fleece from Colchis. Athena Polias, holding fast the
citadels on the cities' summits for the Argonauts, made a
ship that moves rapidly with a light gust of wind, joining
pinewood frameworks for a curved keel. The Argo first
drenched the virgin sea with its travel; as soon as it
plowed with its beak the windy sea and the waves, white with
spume and spun in an eddy by the rowing, the maritime
Nereids raised their faces from the sparkling whirlpool of
the sea in admiration of the sight. The men saw by one and
no other light these mermaids in the nude, stand nipple-naked
in the grey-green swell. Then Peleus, inflamed,
is carried away in love with Thetis, then Thetis does not
scorn human marriage, then her father himself understands
that Peleus must be joined to Thetis. O heroes, born in a
time much desired by the generations, and kin of the gods,
you hail! Good daughter of good mothers, hail again! I'll
address you often in my song. And Peleus, are you the top
man of Thessaly, so especially honored with prosperous
wedding torches, to whom Jupiter himself, himself the father
of the gods, gave his mistress? Did Thetis, the lovely
Nereid, embrace you? Did Tethys and Oceanus, who in the sea
embrace the whole world, grant you their granddaughter to
marry? Then on that very same longed for day, all of
Thessaly thronged to come together to the house, and the
palace was filled with rejoicing crowds: they bore gifts
before themselves and made their delights known by their
countenance. They left Cieros; they left Phthiotic Tempe,
the houses of Crannon and walls of Larisa; they came
together at Pharsalus and filled Pharsalian houses. As
nobody lived in the hinterland, the necks of young bulls had
become soft, the low grapevines hadn't been cleared out with
curved hoes, no bull was tugging at the earth with a sloping
plowshare, no foliage tenders' knives pared down the shadow
of a tree, but rust had been accumulating filth on the
lonely plows. Yet Peleus' home, wherever the opulent palace
extended, was shining with gleaming gold and silver. Ivory
was shining on the thrones, drinking cups were shining on
the table, and the whole house, glittering, rejoiced in the
royal treasure. In the middle of the house there had been
placed, indeed for a godly bride, a marriage couch gleaming
with Indian ivory and covered by porphyry with figures of
Archaic folk, showing with delicate handiwork the rugged
virtue of the heroes. But gazing out from the shore of
Naxos, which resounds with the noise of the sea, Ariadne
watched Theseus' departure by rapid fleet. She has been
bearing untamed passions in her breast, but even now she
doesn't yet believe she sees the things she views; this is
no wonder, since she, then for the first time roused from
deceptive sleep, perceives herself unhappily abandoned on a
lonely beach. But the heedless young man beats the waters of
the sea as he slips off, leaving the empty promises of a
windy gale behind. Ariadne with sad eyes looks at him from
afar, from the rocky seaweed, like a statue of a Maenad.
Alas! She looks at him from afar in turmoil over torrents of
cares, and she fails to hold fast the fine textured
headdress around her blonde hair; her sheer cloak exposes a
breast it no longer veils; and her smooth brassiere no
longer keeps her milk white breasts in bondage. The sea's
waves were playing with everything that had fallen off
Ariadne's body dispersedly before her feet. But, Theseus,
while she was caring for the plight of neither her headdress
nor her flowing cloak, she who is doomed has been depending
on you with all her heart, all her spirit, and all her mind.
O wretched woman, whom Venus has maddened with unremitting
sorrows by sowing in your heart thorny cares since that time
when Theseus, having left the curvaceous shores of Piraeus,
boldly touched upon the Cretan palace and grounds of an
unjust king! They say that Athens, once upon a time
compelled by the cruel Plague to pay penalties for the
killing of Androgeon, was accustomed to giving the Minotaur
select young men as well as the flower of unwed young women
as a sacrificial meal. When the narrow walls were harried by
their woes, Theseus himself wished to fling forth his body
for dear Athens to keep such living corpses of Athens from
being carried to Crete. And so, pressing on in a light boat
and gentle breezes, he comes to great hearted Minos and his
proud places. As soon as royal Ariadne caught sight of him
in a desirous light, the chaste little bed, emitting sweet
fragrances, nursed her in her mother's soft embrace; the
fragrances were like the smell of the myrtles that surround
Eurotas' streams, or the various shades of flowers borne by
the breeze of spring. No sooner than she had lowered some
desirous eyes from Theseus did she catch a flame in her
whole body and blaze up completely from the depth of her
marrow. Alas! Stirring up passions with a pitiless heart, O
Cupid, you mix people's joys with their cares and bring
disastrous results; and you, Venus, who rule lush Idalium,
with such tears have you tormented an inflamed young woman's
mind, for how often she sighs over fair haired Theseus! How
many anxieties has she brought my fainting heart! By how
much more than the color of gold did she often blanch when
Theseus sought either death or the spoils of praise as he
vowed to fight the Minotaur! Promising gifts not in vain and
not unwelcome to the gods, she took up her prayers with
sealed lips. Just as a tree trunk, agitating violently on
the summit of Bull Ridge because of a whirlwind gust,
uproots an oak tree whose bark leaks sap (it falls, roots
and all, driven forcibly out and leaning forth a great
distance, upon far and wide breaking everything in its
path), so Theseus, subdued in body, lay low the beast, who
threw up his horns in vain at the empty winds. From that
point, with much praise, Theseus safely bent back his foot
as he directed his wandering footsteps with a thin string,
lest an undetectable mistake baffle him as he exits the
tortuous turnings of the house. Having digressed from the
first poem, what more shall I recall: how a daughter,
leaving behind the countenance of her father, the embrace of
her sister Phaedra, and finally the embrace of her mother
Pasiphaë, who loved her ill fated daughter to distraction,
chose Theseus' sweet love over all these things; or how,
conveyed by boat, she came to the frothy shores of Nexos; or
how her husband Theseus with heedless heart left her behind,
her eyes bound in sleep as he departed? They often say that
she, raving from a blazing heart, had uttered shrill oaths
from the bottom of her breast, and then that the unhappy
woman climbed steep mountains from which to extend her gaze
into the desolate swell of the sea, and then that she rolled
forth into the waves of the splashing sea that faced her as
she raised the voluptuous coverings from her denuded calf,
and that she had said these unhappy words, her final
lamentation: "Treacherous, treacherous Theseus! Is this the
way you abandon me, who was carried off from patriarchal
altars, onto the lonely shore? Feckless man, have you run
away because you thought the gods' heavenly powers
inconsequential? Are you coming home to bear unholy
perjuries? Could nothing divert the deliberations of a cruel
mind? Did you have no mercy available for your implacable
heart to wish me tenderness? Yet you did not formerly give
me these assurances with a sweet voice, and you were not
bidding me, who was unhappy, to anticipate these things, but
the airy winds tear to pieces a desired marriage and a happy
wedding, the whole of which is null and void. Even now, may
no woman put faith in a man who swears by oath, and may no
woman trust that a man's discourses are worthy of trust;
while the mind of men, when it desires, is especially eager
to obtain something, the men are by no means loath to swear
by oath and by no means refrain from promises: but as soon
as the desirous mind's lust has been satisfied, by no means
do men fear what has been said, and by no means do they care
about their breaches of oath! Certainly I snatched you away
as you were tossing and turning in the middle of death's
maelstrom, and I decided to lose a brother rather than fail
you at a critical and treacherous time. For the which I
shall be given as prey to be torn piecemeal by birds and
beasts, and when I have died, I shall not be covered with a
burial mound! What lioness gave birth to you from her lonely
crag? What sea, conceived by foaming waves, has spit you
out? What Syrtis, what predatory Scylla, what endless
Charybdis gave you birth, you who return such rewards for
living sweet? Though I have known since you shuddered at the
stern orders of your old fashioned parents that you had been
scorning our wedding all along, you nevertheless were able
to bring me home to wait on you in delightful labor as your
servant, refreshing your pale feet with clear water and
covering your bed with the purple bedspread. Furthermore,
right about now Theseus is tossing and turning amid the
waves, and no human form appears among the vast seaweed.
Thus, cruelly mocking me this final time, even stern Fortune
has been begrudging of her ear to my complaints. Almighty
Jupiter, I wish that the sterns of ships had never touched
the Cretan and Athenian shores and that the treacherous
sailor who bears into Crete his gruesome payments to a wild
bull had not untied the hawser of his ship, and that this
malicious guest, hiding cruel purposes with sweet
comportment, had not found rest in my home! Where shall I
return? For what hope shall I, who am lost, ever strive?
Shall I seek Mt. Ida? No, because as it makes a separation
with a broad, swirling mass of water, it divides the
ferocious sea from the bridge. Can it be that I was supposed
to hope for my father's help? Which young man have I let
splatter on my brother's murder? Is it that I am supposed to
take comfort in my husband's devoted love for me? Who is it
taking flight, bending pliant oars into the sea? Moreover,
no house inhabits the lonely island, and no exit from the
sea lies open, thanks to the surrounding waves. There is no
escape, and no hope for one: everything has changed,
everything has been deserted, and everything exhibits death;
nevertheless, my eyes will not grow feeble with death, and
my senses will not withdraw from my exhausted body, until I,
who've been abandoned, demand a stiff penalty from the gods
and invoke the trust of the gods in my final hour.
Wherefore, you Furies, who penalize the deeds of men with
avenging punishment, and whose foreheads, wreathed in
serpentine hair, display the breathing ire of your hearts,
approach, approach to this place, and hear my complaints,
which - alas! - I, miserable and powerless, must speak from
deep inside myself as I burn, blind with demented rage!
Since these complaints are truly borne from the bottom of my
heart, do not let my lamentation be ineffectual, but pollute
Theseus and his kinsmen with the state of mind wherein he
left me when he abandoned me, ye Goddesses!" After she
poured these words forth from her unhappy heart, eagerly
demanding reparations for savage deeds, the gods' ruler,
with unvanquished power, consented, wherefore the earth and
the wild seas violently trembled, and the heavens shook the
twinkling stars. Furthermore, his mind beset by blinding
darkness, Theseus, himself absent of mind, transgressed
every command he'd resolutely honored hitherto, and had
forgotten to gladden his worried father when he failed to
show that his voyage to the Piraeus had been safe. They say
that when to the winds Aegeus entrusted his son, who, upon
showing esteem for the walls of Athens, was leaving them by
fleet, he had given the young man orders of this ilk: "My
only son, more delightful to me than long life, my son, whom
I'm compelled to lower to perilous plights, returned to me
at the dusk of my age, since my fortune and your passionate
courage snatch you away from me against my wishes, I whose
eyes, weak with old age, have not yet been sated by the dear
aspect of my son, neither rejoicing with happy heart shall I
let you go, nor shall I allow you to accept the signs of
favorable fortune, but that first I shall express the many
laments in my mind as I foul my gray hair with dirt and sand
poured thereon, and therefrom I'll suspend dyed sails from a
roaming mast, that a Spanish sail, darkened to rust, shall
bespeak my sorrows and agonies of mind. But if Athena of
sacred Itonus, who has agreed to defend our family and the
seats of Erectheus, has granted that you spatter your right
hand with the blood of a bull, then bring it about that
these orders shall flourish in your mindful heart, and that
no generation shall cause them to be forgotten; that as soon
as your eyes look upon our hills, the yardarms from all
directions shall put away the black dyed sail, and the
twisted ropes shall raise the white sails; and that,
distinguishing them as soon as possible, I shall recognize
glory with a happy mind when the happy day presents you once
again to me." These orders, earlier held in his resolute
mind, left Theseus as clouds, pushed by a gust of the winds,
abandon the airy tip of a snowy mountain. But his father, as
he sought a view from the top of the citadel and wasted away
his anxious eyes in unremitting sobs, and as soon as he
caught sight of the cloth of the dyed sails, threw himself
headfirst from the summit of the projecting rocks because he
believed that Theseus had succumbed to a violent end. Then
she, afflicted and sad, caused varied concerns to roll in
her mind by gazing out at the ship as it left. But from
another part of the quilt, Bacchus, in the glory of his
youth, has been flying about, along with his troupe of
Satyrs and his attendants from Mt. Nysa, looking for you,
Ariadne, and inflamed by your love. The Maenads have raved
for Bacchus dispersedly, with frenzied mind, euhoe! The
Maenads, euhoe, are throwing back their heads! Some of them
were shaking spears with a covered tip, some were tossing
about the limbs of a bullock which had been torn apart, some
were wrapping themselves with twisted serpents, and some
were honoring esoteric icons with hollow wicker boxes, icons
about which the uninitiated long in vain to hear; others
were beating tomtoms with long palms or producing tinny,
clangorous sounds with polished bronze; for many, horns
blasted harsh sounding, booming bass sounds; and an
outlandish pipe made a strident shriek and played a dreadful
song. The bedspread, splendidly decorated with such figures,
having clasped the bed, was covering it with its vesture.
After the Thessalian men have been satisfied with looking
eagerly at these scenes, they begin to make way for the
inviolate gods. Then, as the West Wind, ruf fling the placid
sea with its morning breath, sends the waves tumbling forth
as the goddess of Dawn rises up under the threshold of the
rising sun; the waves, at first brushed back by a gentle
breeze, move forward and liltingly sound with the gentle
beat of laughter; and afterwards, with a growing wind, they
intensify more and more; and, as they float, they gleam to a
great distance from the rosy light; so then, with roaming
foot, each person leaving the forecourt's royal chambers
scattered for home. After the guests' departure, Chiron
first of all came from the top of Mt. Peleus, bearing gifts
of the forest: for whatever flowers the fields bear,
whatever flowers the region of Thessaly, with great
mountains, produces, whatever flowers the fertile breeze of
a warm zephyr by the river waves supplies, he himself bore
them, plaited with an assortment of small wreaths, and the
house laughed, having been refreshed by their delightful
fragrance. Not empty handed, Penios is immediately present,
leaving the green Tempe valley, which everywhere the woods
surround from above, to be filled with Doric dancers as if
at the touch of Minos: for he has brought, roots and all,
tall beech trees and lofty laurels with straight trunks, a
waving plane tree, a supple poplar (the sister of Phaëthon,
who burns), and a towering cypress. He placed these things,
arranged far and wide around the palace of Peleus, that the
covered forecourt might be verdant with voluptuous foliage.
Behind him, Prometheus follows, ingenious of heart,
inconspicuously bearing the scars of an ancient debt, paid
with his limbs tied back to a rock as he hung from the steep
summits. Then, the father of the gods, along with his sacred
wife and his children, came through the sky, leaving you lonely,
Apollo, and leaving your twin sister, who is at the same
time the local goddess of the mountains of Idrus: for along
with you, your sister has likewise spurned Peleus and not
wished to celebrate the wedding of Thetis. Jupiter and Juno
sat on ivory chairs, and the tables were piled high with
various food, when the Moirai began to yield truth telling
songs as they shook their bodies with a feeble motion in the
meantime. White robes with purple hems wrapped the Moirai's
ankles and hugged their gyrating bodies throughout, but red
headbands remained fastened to their white hair, and their
hands duly pressed on with their everlasting toil. Her left
hand held a distaff wrapped in soft wool, and then her right
hand, lightly bringing down the threads, would shape a
mantle as her fingers faced upward; then, with her thumb
facing the ground, she would turn her spindle, which is
weighted with a round weight. Then her tooth would always
even up the thread as she nibbled; to her dry lips there
would cling woolly morsels, which had earlier been strands
standing out from smooth thread. Also, before her feet,
small wicker baskets contained the soft fleece of white
wool. Then the Moirai, beating the fleece with a clear
sounding voice, uttered the following prophecies by divine
incantation, a song which no age of treachery will
thereafter prove wrong: You, Peleus, who increase the best
of the best with great examples of virtue, O guardian of
Emathia, most dear to Jupiter, hear what your sisters reveal
to you by the happy light of day, a truth telling oracle:
but you, the weighted spindles, follow these crossthreads as
prophecies; run, run as you lead them! To you, Peleus, the
evening star will come now, bringing things desired by
husbands; your bride, under a lucky star, will come to
suffuse your mind with persuasive love, ready to join with
you into languid little dreams as she offers her smooth arms
to your strong neck. You weighted spindles, run, run as you
weave the crossthreads of life! No house has ever sheltered
such lovers, no love has ever joined lovers with such a bond
as the harmony present for Thetis, the harmony present for
Peleus. You weighted spindles, run, run as you weave the
crossthreads of life! To the two of you Achilles will be
born immune to extreme fear, known by enemies not for his
back but for his stalwart chest. Quite often the winner in
the far ranging contest of running, he will outrun the fiery
swift tracks of a swift moving doe. You weighted spindles,
run, run as you weave the crossthreads of life! No hero will
compare to him in war when the Phrygian fields flow with
Teucrian blood, and as he besieges the Trojan town walls
during a war prolonged, the third heir of oath breaking
Pelops will lay them to waste. You weighted spindles, run,
run as you weave the crossthreads of life! At the funeral
rites of sons who opposed Achilles in battle, mothers will
often confess his outstanding virtues and famous feats as
they tear unkempt hair from their gray heads and bruise
their wizened breasts with their feeble palms. You weighted
spindles, run, run as you weave the crossthreads of life!
For just as a reaper, gathering closely packed ears of grain
before their time, mows the yellow fields under the burning
sun, Achilles will smite the bodies of Trojan men with his
hostile iron sword. You weighted spindles, run, run as you
weave the crossthreads of life! Spread out dispersedly from
the fast flowing Dardanelles, the Scamander River will
witness many examples of virtue; Achilles, narrowing the
Dardanelles' path with piles of bodies hewn, will warm the
deep rivers with gore indiscriminate. You weighted spindles,
run, run as you weave the crossthreads of life! Then Priam's
daughter as well will witness death when a rounded funeral
pyre, piled up in a lofty mound of rubble, will receive the
snowy limbs of the young girl smitten. You weighted
spindles, run, run as you weave the crossthreads of life! As
soon as Fortune gives the exhausted Greeks an opportunity to
dislodge Troy's surrounding walls, which Neptune built, the
deep tombs will become wet with the blood of Polyxena, who,
just as she submits as living sacrificial victim to the
Janus faced axe, already a corpse will fling her trunk onto
her bent knee. You weighted spindles, run, run as you weave
the crossthreads of life! Therefore, join together in
heartfelt love. May Peleus receive Thetis in happy bonding,
and now, after all this time, may the wife be delivered to
her eager husband! You weighted spindles, run, run as you
weave the crossthreads of life! Thetis' nurse, returning at
dawn, will be unable to fit the thread of yesterday around
the neck of Thetis, and the anxious mother of a quarrelsome
daughter will not sadly cease to hope for dear descendants
because her daughter sleeps apart from Peleus. You weighted
spindles, run, run as you weave the crossthreads of life!
Singing by way of preface such erstwhile happy songs of
Peleus, the Moirai sang with divine soul. For when
righteousness was not yet spurned, heaven's inhabitants used
to go to see the heroes' houses, free from wrong, and reveal
themselves in the guise of a mortal throng. The father of
the gods, paying his regular visit to the gleaming temple,
caught sight of one hundred bulls falling forward onto the
ground, since the yearly rites had come on the festal days.
Often, Dionysus, rambling on the utmost summit of Parnasus,
conducted the Maenads, with disheveled hair, shouting,
"Euhoe," since the people of Delphi, rushing from all over
the city and eagerly vying with one another, happily
received the god as the altars issued smoke. Often, Mars, in
a death bearing contest of battle, or Athena, mistress of
the swift Triton River, or Artemis urged armed squadrons on
in person. But after the earth was given its first
experience of unspeakable crime, and everyone expelled
justice from his greedy mind, brothers drenched their hands
in brotherly blood, the son ceased to mourn his deceased
parents, the father wished for the funeral of his youthful
son that he might freely enjoy the youthful beauty of his
unwed stepmother, and the mother, blasphemously offering her
son her sex, did not fear defiling the household gods with
sinful acts. All things, lawful or not, blended thoroughly
with malicious passion, diverted from us the just mind of
the gods. The gods therefore will neither visit our weddings
nor be illuminated by the bright light of day.
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
Hortalus, though through unremitting pain concern draws me,
who am exhausted, from the Muses, and my mind cannot produce
their sweet fruit, my very thoughts surge like waves for
such troubles— for recently a wave flowing from the sea of
Lethe has washed my brother's pale little foot, which,
removed from our eyes, the Trojan ground crushes under the
shore of Rhoeteum... ...My brother, dearer than life, will I
never look upon you hereafter? No, but certainly I'll always
love you: I'll always sing solemn poems about your death,
which Procne will sing along with me under the dense shadows
of branches as she groans the prophetic utterances of Itys,
removed by death. But in such bouts of grief, Hortalus, I
nevertheless send you these translations of Callimachus,
lest perchance you should think that your words, entrusted
in vain, have slipped from my mind to the wandering winds,
just as an apple, a fiancé's secret pledge given, rolls
forth from his maiden's chaste lap because the apple, having
been placed under the voluptuous dress of the girl who
unhappily has forgotten, is shaken out when she suddenly
jumps up at her mother's approach, and is suddenly thrown in
a fall to the ground as a self-conscious blush runs over her
unhappy face.
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
Conon searched the heavenly bodies of the vast sky and saw
the risings and settings of the stars, how the fiery
brightness of the scorching sun is darkened, how heavenly
bodies depart at certain times, and how, from any orbit in
the air, sweet love stealthily calls Diana down and banishes
her under the rocks of Latmus: that selfsame Conon, in the
light of the heavens, saw me, a lock of long hair from the
crown of Berenice's head. As I shimmered, Berenice promised
me to many of the goddesses as she stretched her smooth arms
forth, and in that season a king, glorified by his new
marriage, had gone to sack Syrian land; he carried
victorious marks from a nocturnal brawl that he had
conducted for the spoils of a virgin. But is sex really
baleful to brides? Or can it be that their parents’
pleasures are spoiled by the duplicitous tearlets that
brides shed in torrents within the bedroom's doorway? The
gods sigh over these questions and therefore would not
please me. By her many complaints, her majesty taught me
this when her new husband went to witness fierce battles:
when you were alone, Berenice, you mourned not your
destitute couch, but your lamentable separation from your
brother, the second Ptolemy! How deeply your anxiety has
eaten away at your sad interior! Your senses had been
snatched away, and how your mind failed you then, when you
were anxious with all your heart! Nevertheless, I knew for a
fact that you were brave since you were a little girl. Can
it be that you have forgotten the good intrigue whereby you
won your royal spouse because nobody else dared more
bravely? But what sad words you spoke then, as you were
letting your husband go! O Jupiter, how often you rubbed
your eyes with your hand! What such a god has changed you?
Can it be because lovers do not want to be away from a dear
body? And then you offered me, not without the blood of a
bull, to all of the gods in return for your sweet husband,
if it would bring his return. He had added captured Asia
Minor to the borders of Egypt in what was not a long time.
In return for these deeds, as a novel offering of thanks, I
repay ancient prayers fulfilled by the heavenly crowds.
Unwillingly, your majesty, I departed from your head,
unwillingly: I swear by you and your head, but if anyone
will have foolishly sworn by this, may he get the things he
deserves; but who would claim that he is equal to scissors?
That largest mountain in the land, over which the bright sun
is driven, was also brought down when the Persians produced
a new sea and when a barbaric soldiery sailed by fleet
through the center of Athos. What will hair do, when such
things fall because of an iron blade? O Jupiter, I wish that
the Chalybes and those who first began to look underground
for veins of ore and draw the hardness of iron into bars
would perish! My sisters were mourning my fate, the fate of
hair recently severed, when the brother of Ethiopian king
Memnon, beating against the air with changing wings,
presented himself as the winged horse of Locrian Arsinoë,
and, carrying me off through the shades of the sky, flew
away to place me on the chaste lap of Venus. Arsinoë
Zephyritis, who is Venus herself, the Greek inhabitant of
Canopus' shores, had sent her servant there as an envoy.
From that point, in order that the golden crown from
Ariadne's times should not become fixed alone in the sky's
dappled radiance, but that the both of us should shine as
dedicated mementos of a blonde head, divine Venus placed me
in the regions of the gods, a new constellation among
ancient constellations as I was damp, departing from a wave.
For, touching the light of Virgo and savage Leo, and close
to Callisto, who stands next to her father Lycaon, I wheel
to my setting, leading the way before slow Boötes, who is
immersed quite late in deep Oceanus. But although the
footprints of the gods weigh me down at night, the light of
day nevertheless gives me back to white haired Tethys.
(Nemesis, by your leave, may I speak here? I will not hide
truths out of fear, and if the stars will tear me to pieces
for my troublesome words, I will not hide truths and fail to
reveal what has been put away in a true heart.) I do not
rejoice in these circumstances so much as I am vexed that
I'll always, always be absent from the head of my mistress,
the one with whom I drank many thousands of unguents, while
she was a young girl formerly devoid of all perfumes. Now
you, whom the wedding torch has united by a hoped for flame
and who look after the laws with a chaste bed, when your
clothing has been thrown aside, do not entrust your bodies
to your like-minded husbands as you denude your breasts,
before an onyx jar, your onyx jar, pours me its delightful
libations. But she who has given herself to morally foul
adultery - oh! - the shallow dust drinks her vain and
malicious gifts; I seek no offerings from unworthy people.
But rather, you wives, may harmony and an unremitting love
always, always inhabit your homes. To be sure, your majesty,
when you appease the divine Venus as you look at the stars
on holidays, do not allow me, who am your own, to go
unanointed, but rather treat me with abundant offerings. I
wish that the stars would fall down! I wish that I were to
become royal hair and that Orion were now shining by
Aquarius!
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
O Door, delightful to a charming husband, delightful to one
with children, hello, and may Jupiter bless you with good
fortune, which they say once served Balbus well when he held
the house as an old man, but which they say served his son
grudgingly after your marriage, when the old man had been
stretched out in death. Come, tell us why you are said to
have changed and forsaken your trust in the old lord. (Thus
may I please Caecilius, to whom I now have been handed
over): it is not my fault, though it is said to be mine, and
nobody can speak of any offense of mine; it is truly the
judgment of the populace that the door does each deed.
Wherever it is discovered that something has not been done
in a moral manner, they all shout at me, "Door, it's your
fault!" But it is not enough for you to say that which I
mention in one word, to make anyone see and understand. "How
am I able? Nobody asks or seeks to understand." We are
willing: don't hesitate to tell us. First of all, as for the
story that a young woman was entrusted to me, that's a lie.
Granted, her first husband didn't touch her; his drooping
penis, more flaccid than a tender beet, never raised itself
to the middle of his tunic, but the father of the son is
said to have defiled the couch and stained the hapless house
with scandal, whether because his irreverent mind burned
with blind lust, or because his lazy son had sterile semen,
so that from somewhere a more sinewy member was to be
sought, which could untie the chastity belt of a virgin. You
give an account, with remarkably dutiful respect, of an
illustrious father, who himself urinated on the lap of his
own son: "You haven't heard the half of it: Brescia, placed
at the foot of Cycnus' lookout point, and past which golden
Mella runs as a gentle river, mother Brescia, loved in my
Verona, says she knows for a fact not only this, but also
tells about trysts with Postumius and Cornelius, with whom
that woman committed a grievous act of adultery. At this
point, someone might say, 'What? You know all these things
you're telling me, Door, you to whom being absent from your
master's doorway and eavesdropping on people is never
permitted, but attached here beneath the lintel, are you
accustomed only to opening and closing the house?' I often
heard her speaking in a furtive voice alone with her
servants about these outrages of hers and mentioning by name
those whom I have mentioned, naturally anticipating that I
have neither tongue nor ear. Moreover, she would add mention
of a particular man whom I don't want to name lest he raise
his red eyebrows in anger. He is a tall man, against whom
feigned childbirth once brought huge lawsuits, for she had
padded her belly."
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
That you, overwhelmed by fortune and bitter plight, send me
this short letter, written down with tears, that I may
rescue one shipwrecked, expelled by the frothing waves of
the sea, and bring him back in health from the threshold of
death, him whom heavenly Venus provides no relief, alone in a
celibate bed, in languid sleep, nor Muses delight with sweet
song of ancient writers when your mind stays anxiously awake
all night, pleases me because you tell me I'm your friend
and seek the gifts both of the Muses and of Venus. But lest
you not know my misfortunes, Manius, or think I rue my
guest's obligation, listen, lest you further seek from a
miserable man the blessed gifts wherewith I myself am
submerged in the waves of Fortune. At that time when a grown
man's toga was first handed down to me, when the age, rife
with flowers, issued a pleasant spring, I had plenty of
playful affairs: the goddess is well aware of us, she who
mixes our sweet bitterness with cares. But grief over my
brother's death has taken this pastime away from me
entirely. My brother, unhappily removed from me, as you were
dying, you broke my advantages; my brother, our whole house
was buried along with you, and all our joys perished along
with you, joys which your kind friendship nurtured in life.
Because of untimely death I have expelled from my entire
consciousness these pastimes and all delights of the mind.
Wherefore, because you write that it is shameful for
Catullus to be in Verona, because here, anyone who is anyone
would be wont to warm limbs cold from a lonely bed, it is
not just a shame, Manius, but a source of real grief.
Therefore, please forgive me if I do not grant you the gifts
which grief has taken from me, for I cannot so grant them.
For, as for the fact that I do not have a great abundance of
writings at my family home in Verona, it happens that we
live in Rome: that house, that home of mine, there my life
is browsed, and one small scroll case out of many follows me
here. Since it is so, I wouldn't want you to decide that I'm
doing this out of spite or lack of appropriate generosity
because an abundance of neither kind of poem has been sent
to you though you have sought it. If any such abundance were
forthcoming, I would produce it unasked. I cannot keep
silent, ye goddesses, about the matter with which Allius
Manius has helped me, or about the extent of the obligations
with which he has helped me, lest his life, which slips away
as the generations forget, cover this zeal with a blind
night: but I'll tell you, hereafter tell many thousands and
make this roll of papyrus speak when it is old... ...When he
is dead, may he become more and more famous, and may no
spider do her work, weaving a thin web high upon Allius'
lonely name! You know what concern two-faced Venus has given
me, and in what manner she has parched me, for I've been
burning like Etna's Sicilian crag or the waters of Malis in
the hot gates of Mount Oeta, and my hapless eyes have not
stopped wasting away in unremitting tears, and my cheeks
have not stopped being wet with the gloomy tears of rain. As
a stream, shining on the summit of an airy mountain, a
stream that rushes forth from the mossy stone, cuts through
the way of a dense population and suddenly rolls from a
sloping valley is sweet comfort to a tired, sweaty traveler
when severely hot weather cracks the parched fields, and
precisely as a second wind that comes blowing rather gently
is sweet comfort after sailors have been buffeted about in a
black tornado, such help has Allius Manius been to me, now
that the prayers of Castor and Pollux have been issued. With
a wide path, he has opened up a shut plain, and he has given
a home to me and to Lesbia, to which she and I would come to
ply our mutual love. My radiant goddess brought herself
fleetly to Allius' home and set her foot's gleaming sole in
the worn doorway, her weight balanced on a squeaky sandal,
as Laodamia, burning with love, once came to the house of
her husband Protesilaus, a house begun in vain, since no
sacrificial animal had yet appeased the heavenly masters
with its holy blood. Nemesis, nothing of the sort that is
undertaken recklessly, when the gods are unwilling, would
please me so very much. Laodamia learned how the hungry
altar longed for upright blood when her husband was taken
away, and she was compelled to let go of her new husband's
neck before the return of winter had satisfied her
passionate love in the long nights, with the result that she
was able to live after breaking off the marriage, which the
Fates knew would not be a long way off if he went as a
soldier to Troy. At that time, with the abduction of Helen,
Troy had begun to rouse the chief men of the Argives toward
herself, Troy (horror!), shared tomb of Asia and Europe,
Troy, cruel funeral pyre of all men and virtues, which has
even brought a miserable death to my brother! Our whole
house has been buried together with you, and all our joys
have perished together with you, which your sweet friendship
nurtured in life. A foreign land holds him deep under ground
now, so far away, not among familiar tombs, and not placed
beside the ashes of relatives, but buried unhappily in Troy,
loathsome Troy! Whither, then, the conscripted men of
Greece, hurrying from all directions to forsake their
domestic hearths, are drawn, lest Paris, having rejoiced
after Helen was enticed away, freely spend idle pleasures in
a placid bed chamber. Then, because of this plight, most
beautiful Laodamia, a marriage dearer than life and spirit
was taken away from you. A flood, engulfing you in such a
whirlpool of love, had carried you off into a deep pit of
catastrophe, such as, the Greeks say, drains the floor of
Mount Cyllene, near Pheneus, the swamp having been milled: a
pit which Hercules, falsely fathered, is said once to have
dug, when the innards of the mountain had fallen, at which
time he killed the monsters of Stymphalus with an unerring
arrow under the command of lesser Eurystheus, that the door
of the heavens might be traversed by more divinities, and
Hebe shortly lose her virginity. But deeper than that pit
was your deep love, which, though you were indomitable,
taught you to bear the yoke of marriage. And our daughter
does not cherish so dear the head of a late grandson when
her father is exhausted with age; the grandson, when at long
last having acquired his grandfather's riches, enters his
name in the account books, signed in the presence of a
witness, dislodges a vulture from a whitened head the
impious joys of a ridiculous distant relative; nor did
anyone who was the wife of a snow-white cock pigeon rejoice
so much, a pigeon who is said always to snatch kisses rather
wantonly from many a biting beak; how especially promiscuous
is Lesbia! But you alone have conquered their great
passions, as once and for all you have been united to a fair
husband. My sweetheart, compared to Laodamia, is then worthy
to concede little or nothing to my lap; blond Cupid has
often gleamed in a saffron yellow tunic, running here and
there around her. Although she nevertheless is not satisfied
with one Catullus, we bear the infrequent and furtive trysts
of a chaste mistress, lest we be annoying, in the manner of
fools. Even Juno, the greatest of the goddesses, often
stomachs her burning anger at her husband's wrongdoing,
knowing of more trysts of all-desiring Jupiter. But it isn't
just to compare people to gods... ...Take the unwelcome
burden of a trembling father. Besides, she didn't come
brought down by my father's right hand to my house, redolent
with Oriental fragrance, but gave secret little favors on an
extraordinary night, when she was removed from the very lap
of her husband himself. Therefore, it is enough if this day,
which she marks, is given to me with a whiter stone than
ordinary days! Allius Manius, this gift, wrought as well as
I could in verse, is rendered to you in return for your many
favors, lest this day and that touch your name with a
scabrous blight. To this total, the gods will add so many
more gifts, the which Themis once upon a time was accustomed
to bearing to upright people in ancient times. May you and
your life as well be prosperous, and the very house in which
Lesbia and I have played, and Allius, who first has given us
land and now carries it away, from the tip of whom
everything good was originated, and my sweetheart, who is
far dearer to me than all others, dearer to me than I myself
am: my life is sweet with her alive.
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
Wonder not, Rufus, why none of the opposite sex
wishes to place her dainty thighs beneath you,
not even if you undermine her virtue with gifts of choice
silk or the enticement of a pellucid gem.
You are being hurt by an ugly rumour which asserts
that beneath your armpits dwells a ferocious goat.
This they fear, and no wonder; for it's a right rank
beast that no pretty girl will go to bed with.
So either get rid of this painful affront to the nostrils
or cease to wonder why the ladies flee.
My woman says to me that there is none
With whom she'd rather spend her days than I,
Should even Jove himself ask her to wed.
So she says, but women often lie,
What a woman says to a desirous lover,
This he ought to write in the wind and rapid water.
If a goat’s smell under the arms rightly prevents anyone,
or if a slow gout deservedly cripples them,
your rival, who keeps your lover busy,
is discovered by you to be wonderfully sick with both.
Now whenever he fucks her, you’re revenged on the pair:
she’s troubled by the smell, he’s ruined by the gout.
You used to say that you knew only Catullus,
Lesbia, neither did you wish to know Jupiter instead of me.
At that time I loved you not as the common crowd of men love a girlfriend
but as a father loves his sons and sons in law.
Now I know you: wherefore even if I burn the worse,
you are cheaper and of less meaning to me.
You say how can this be? Because a hurt of such a kind
forces a lover to love more, but to wish her less well.
Stop wishing to be entitled to anything from anyone
Or thinking that anyone is able to become grateful.
All things are unappreciated, it is not profitable to have done
Anything with kindness, on the contrary it is tiring and even more harmful;
As it is to me, whom no one distresses more seriously nor more painfully,
Than he who holds me as his one and only friend
Gellius once heard that an uncle is supposed to scold
if anyone should say or do any hanky-panky.
Lest this should happen to himself, he screwed his uncle's
own wife and swore the uncle to silence.
Now he does what he wishes: even should he force
his own uncle to suck him off, the uncle would say not a word.
To this point here my mind has been dragged down, Lesbia, by your fault
And so by its own devotion the mind itself has destroyed itself,
As now it is not possible to respect you, if you should become very good,
Nor is it able to stop loving you, even if you should do every bad thing.
If there is any pleasure for a man in remembering former
good deeds, when he thinks himself to be dutiful,
nor to have violated a sacred trust, nor in any contract
of the gods abused divine power to deceive men,
much joy remains for you, Catullus, in this long life,
furnished from this thankless love.
For whatever man can either say or do well
for anyone, this has been said and done by you:
having been entrusted to an ungrateful heart, all that perished.
Therefore, why do you now suffer more?
Why not be obstinate in your mind and bring yourself back from thence
and cease to be unhappy in front of the unwilling gods.
It is difficult to set aside a longstanding love.
it is difficult, but let us do it at any hazard.
This is the only safety, and you must overcome this,
whether it is not possible or it is possible.
O gods, if it is your will to have pity,
or if you have ever brought your help to any already
at the extreme, in death itself, look upon my unhappiness and,
if I have lived life in a pure manner,
remove this plague and ruin from me,
which stealing upon me inmost as a lethargy in my limbs
expelled the happiness from all my heart.
I no longer ask for that, that she chooses me in return,
or, because it is not possible, she chooses to be chaste:
I wish that I myself be healthy and put aside this horrible disease.
O gods, give this back to me for my piety.
Rufus believed friend to me in vain and to no purpose
(in vain? rather with a great and evil price)
Is this the way you creep up to me, and burning my inner organs
you snatched away all our good things from miserable me?
You snatched away, alas alas cruel posion of our life,
alas alas plague of our friendship.
Gallus has brothers, of whom one has the loveliest wife
the other the loveliest son.
Gallus is a cute man: since he joins them as lovers,
so that beautiful boy beds with beautiful girl.
Gallus is a stupid man, not seeing himself as a husband,
who instructs a nephew in an uncle’s wife’s adultery.
Lesbius is pretty. Why not? Lesbia prefers him
more than you with your whole people, Catullus.
But still, the pretty boy would sell Catullus with his people,
if he finds three kisses of acquaintances.
How should I explain, Gellius, why those rosy lips of yours
should be whiter than the snows of winter,
when you leave your house in the morning
and when the eighth hour rouses you
from a gentle nap when the day is long?
Certainly there is something: do the rumors
indeed whisper truly that you eat out
the full-grown erections from the middle of men?
Certainly it is thus: they cry out that poor little Victor's
balls have been burst and your lips have been
stained with sucked-off cum.
Can there be no one in all these people, Iuventius,
no nice man you might begin to like,
besides that guest of yours, yellower than a gilded statue,
from the environs of deadly Pesaro,
who pleases you now, whom you dare to prefer
to me, and do who knows what with?
Quintus, if you wish Catullus to owe his eyes to you
or anything if there is more dear than eyes are,
be unwilling to snatch from him what is much more dear than his
eyes are or what is more dear than his eyes are.
Lesbia says many bad things of me in front of her man:
These are the source of greatest joy for that fatuous ass.
Fool, do you perceive nothing? If she could forget me and shut up,
She'd be sane: now because she whines and slanders me,
Not only does she remember me, but, what is oh so much worse,
She is angry. That's that, she burns even as she speaks.
"Hopporunity" he was saying whenever he wished to say opportunity
And ambush Arrius was saying "hambush,"
And then he was hoping that he had spoken wonderfully
Whenever with as much effort as he could he said "hambush."
I believe, thus his mother, thus his free uncle,
Thus his maternal grandfather and grandmother he said.
With this man having been sent into Syria, everyone's ears found relief:
They were hearing the same thing more softly and more lightly,
Nor afterwards were they themselves fearing such words,
When suddenly the horrible message is brought that:
The Ionian waves, afterwards Arrius had gone there,
Now were no longer Ionian but "Hionian."
I hate and I love. Wherefore would I do this, perhaps you ask?
I do not know. But I feel that it happens and I am tortured.
Quintia is beautiful to many. For me she is white, tall,
well-built: I admit these attributes singly.
But deny the notion of the idea of beauty: because no grace,
not a grain of humour is in such a large body.
Lesbia is beautiful, who is not only totally and extremely so,
but also has stolen all the attractions of all other women.
No woman can truthfully say she was so much loved,
as my Lesbia was loved by me.
No such big trust was ever kept in any commitment before
as, on my side, my love for you was kept.
What does he do, Gellius, he who lusts after his own mother and sisters,
and stays awake all night, tunics thrown astride them?
What does he do, he who does not allow his paternal uncle to be the husband?
Have you any notion of the extent of iniquity that he performs?
Gellius, he does it to the extent that neither Oceanus, father of the nymphs,
nor his wife Tethys, who lives at the world's edge, washes his sins away:
there isn't any crime to which he could further proceed
if he weren't to devour himself as he lowers his head!
Gellius is lean: why shouldn't he be? Why would he who has such a good mother,
who lives so healthfully, who has such a lovely sister,
such a good uncle and such an abundance of consanguineous girls
stop being so scrawny?
You'll find the reason is that he remains scrawny in order that he might touch nothing
save as much as he wants of what he has no right at all to touch.
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
Let a magus be born from the illicit union of Gellius and his mother, and let him learn the Persian art of divination: it is proper that a magus be born of a mother and her son if reports of the Persians' impiety be true that he might gratefully worship his gods with appropriate song as he melts peritoneum with fire!
Taken with kind permission from Brendan
It’s not because I knew you well or thought you faithful,
Gellius, or thought you could keep your mind from vile sin,
that I expected you to be true to me
in this hopeless ruinous love of mine:
but because I was aware that she, for whom a vast desire
consumes me, was no mother or sister of yours.
And though I was closely linked to you by friendship,
I didn’t think that was enough excuse for you.
You considered it enough: there’s so much pleasure
in every game to you, in which there’s any sin.
Lesbia always talks bad to me nor is she ever silent
about me: Lesbia is loving me, if not, I may be destroyed.
By what sign? Because they are the same signs: I am showing her
disapproval constantly, I am lost if I do not love.
I am not really keen, Caesar, to wish to pander to you,
Nor to know whether you are a hero or a villain.
Mentula is an adulterer. Why certainly he is. How could he be anything
else with a name such as his. It is as natural as for a pot to gather vegetables.
Zmyrma of my Cinnae.. *******
Finally after the ninth harvest, and after the ninth winter from
which it was started it has been published, when meanwhile Hortensious
(wrote) 500,000 in one ....
Zyrmia will be sent within to the deep waves of Satrachos.
Grey Haired ages, will unroil the Zyrmia for a long time.
But the annals of Velusius will die near Padua itself,
and they will often give loose wrapping for Macherel.
If anything grateful or pleasing to silent tombs
is able to happen from our grief, Calvus,
by which longing we renew old loves and
we weep for the long departed friendships,
certainly her untimely death is not such great grief
for Quintilia as she rejoices from your love.
I did not (may the gods love me) think it mattered,
whether I might be smelling Aemilius’s mouth or arse.
The one’s no cleaner, the other’s no dirtier,
in fact his arse is both cleaner and nicer:
since it’s no teeth. Indeed, the other has
foot long teeth, gums like an old box-cart,
and jaws that usually gape like the open
cunt of a pissing mule on heat.
He fucks lots of women, and makes himself out
to be charming, and isn’t set to the mill with the ass?
Shouldn’t we think, of any girl touching him,
she’s capable of licking a foul hangman’s arse?
What can be said to you, if to anyone, stinking Victius,
is said to wind bags and fools.
For with that tongue, if the occasion should arise,
you could lick arses and farmers' boots.
If you want to destroy us altogether, Victius, yawn:
you will accomplish what you want altogether.
I stole from you, while you were playing, honey-sweet Juventius,
a kiss more sweet than sweet ambrosia.
But I did not get away with it: for such a long hour
I remember being crucified on the greatest cross,
and then I apologized to you, but I was not able to remove
with any tears even a little of your ferocity.
For at the same time it was done, you wiped clean
your lips, bathed by many tears, with all your fingers,
nor did anything remained received from my face,
just as if it were the filthy spit of a filthy prostitute.
Besides this, you did not hold back from making me miserable,
troubled by love, and tormented in every way,
so that to me that kiss changed from ambrosia
to a bitterer thing than a bitter herb.
Because you put forth such a punishment for miserable love,
never will I after this steal a kiss.
Caelius with Aufilenus, and Quintius with Aufilena,
both madly in love with the brother, the sister,
the flower of Veronese youth. That as they say’s
truly sweet, that fellowship of brothers.
Who shall I favour more? You, Caelius, since
your friendship, alone, saw me through my passion,
when the furious flames scorched me to the core.
Be happy, Caelius, be successful in love.
Through many peoples and many seas have I travelled
to thee, brother, and these wretched rites of death
I bring a last gift but can speak only to ashes
Since Fortune has taken you from me
Poor brother! stolen you away from me
leaving me only ancient custom to honour you
as it has been from generation to generation
Take from my hands these sad gifts covered in tears
Now and forever, brother, Hail and farewell.
If anything was ever entrusted by a friend to a silent
sure one, whose loyalty of spirit is deeply known,
you’ll find I’m equally bound by that sacred rite,
Cornelius, and turned into a pure Harpocrates.
If you hear this, Silo, either return 10,000 sesterces,
being as fierce and indomitable as you can, or,
if the cash pleases you, stop, I pray,
being a pimp and feirce and foul-tempered at the the same time.
Do you think I could speak ill of my own life,
she who’s dearer to me than my two eyes?
I couldn’t, nor, if I could, would I love so desperately:
but you, with Tappo, you do everything monstrous.
Mentula the Cock tries to climb the Parnassian Mount:
the Muses with pitchforks toss him out, head first.
What else should one who sees an auctioneer with a beautiful boy,
believe except that he is intent on selling himself?
If anything happened to one who is desirous and hopeful, yet unexpecting,
this is especially pleasing to the soul.
Therefore, this is pleasing, and dearer than gold to me,
because you, Lesbia, have restored yourself to desirous me.
You restore yourself to desirous, unexpecting me, you return yourself
to me. O, light of a fairer mark!
Who lives more happily than I alone, or who will be able
to say that these things are to be hoped for more than this life?
If, Cominus, by the will of the people,
you should die in grizzled old age,
depraved by impure customs,
I for my part do not doubt that first
your tongue, having been cut out
as the enemy of good men,
would be given to a greedy vulture,
a raven would devour your gouged-out eyes
with his black throat, dogs your intestines,
and wolves the rest of your limbs.
You, my life, promise that this love
of ours between us shall be agreeable and last forever.
Great gods, arrange for her to speak the truth,
and to say this sincere and from the bottom of her heart,
so that it is granted us to continue all our life
this treaty of inviolable friendship.
Aufillena, good girl-friends always are praised:
They receive their price for that which
they set out to do. Because you promised,
because you lied to me, you shameful girl,
because you did not give though you have often received,
you do an evil deed. Either it is proper
as a freewoman to perform, or it was proper
for a chaste woman not to have promised, Aufillena:
but to seize gifts, by cheating him out of services,
is more characteristic of a greedy whore
who prostitutes herself with her whole body.
Aufillena, to live satisfied with one man is the glory
of all greatest glories for wives: but it is better
for any woman to submit herself to anyone rather than
for a mother to conceive cousins from her uncle.
You are a lot of man, Naso, and not many men do not use you for anal sex: Naso, you are much the catamite.
In Pompey's first consulship, cinna,
two men slept with Maecilia:
with him made consul again, a thousand seperate rivals are,
his semen is productive for adultery.
They say, no lie, that Mentula the Cock is rich
with the pastures of Firmum, full of good things,
fowling of every kind, fish, meadows, fields and game.
In vain: his income’s surpassed by his costs.
So, I concede he’s rich, while everything’s lacking.
lets praise the pastures, so long as he’s in want.
Mentula’s as good as thirty acres of meadows,
forty of fields: the rest of it’s marsh.
Why shouldn’t he exceed Croesus in riches,
one who possesses so many assets, in land,
meadows, fields, vast woods and pastures and pools
as far as the Hyperboreans, and Ocean’s seas?
All this is great, but he’s the greatest of all,
not a man, but, in truth, a great projecting Cock.
I’ve often been searching around, my busy mind hunting,
as to how I could send you Callimachus’s poems,
so they’d soften you towards me, so you’d not try
to land your hostile shafts on my head,
now I see I’ve troubled myself in vain,
Gellius, my good intentions were worthless.
I’ll evade the shafts of yours you fire at me,
but you’ll be punished, fixed for ever by mine.
...If you who are brave will be readers of my foolishness,
Then your hands will not tremble as they reach towards my poems...
Not if I were made the guardian of the Cretans,
not if I were borne by the flight of Pegasus,
not if I were a Ladas or wing-footed Perseus,
not if I were the snowy, swift team of King Rhesus;
add to all this feathered feet and the ability to fly,
and at the same time seek the speed of the winds
which you could harness and bestow on me, Camerius:
however, I would still be wearied in all the marrow of my bones
and eaten away by great exhaustion
from seeking you, my friend, for myself.
But now I grieve that your foul saliva
has polluted the pure lips of a pure girl.
Still you’ll not do it with impunity: now all the years
will know you, and ancient tradition tell what you are.

"To whom inscribe my charming new book—just out and with ashen pumice
 polished?"
Cornelius
", to you! for you
 used to deem my triflings of account, and at a time when you alone of Italians
 dared unfold the ages' abstract in three chronicles—learned, by"
"!—and most
 laboriously written. Therefore take this booklet, such as it is, and, O Virgin
 Patroness, may it outlive generations more than one."
"To whom inscribe my charming new book—just out and with ashen pumice
 polished?"
Cornelius
", to you! for you
 used to deem my triflings of account, and at a time when you alone of Italians
 dared unfold the ages' abstract in three chronicles—learned, by"
"!—and most
 laboriously written. Therefore take this booklet, such as it is, and, O Virgin
 Patroness, may it outlive generations more than one."
"Sparrow, darling of my girl, with which she plays, which she presses to her
 bosom, to whom she gives her fingertip, arousing sharp bites as he seeks after
 it, when gleaming with desire of me she jests a light joke of it, so that, I
 think, it is a solace for her pain when the heavy burning is at rest. Could I
 but play with you just as she does and lighten the sad cares of mind. ... This
 was as pleasing to me as the golden apple was to the fleet footed girl, which
 unloosed her girdle long-time fastened."
"O mourn, you Loves and Cupids, and all men of gracious mind. Dead is the sparrow
 of my girl, sparrow, darling of my girl, which she loved more than her eyes; for
 it was sweet as honey, and its mistress knew it as well as a girl knows her own
 mother. Nor did it move from her lap, but hopping round first one side then the
 other, to its mistress alone it continually chirped. Now it fares along that
 path of shadows from where nothing may ever return. May evil befall you, savage
 glooms of Orcus, which swallow up all things of fairness: which have snatched
 away from me the comely sparrow. O wretched deed! O hapless sparrow! Now on your
 account my girl's sweet eyes, swollen, redden with tear-drops."
"That pinnace which you see, my friends, says that it was the speediest of boats,
 that it could gain the lead of any craft skimming the surface, whether the task
 were to fly with oarblades or sail. And she denies that the shore of the
 menacing Adriatic denies this, or the"
awkward [to navigate], or noble
"and bristling Thracian
 Propontis, or the frim Pontic gulf, where she afterwards was a pinnace,
 beforehand was bearded forest; and often on Cytorus' ridge she gave out a
 rustling with speaking foliage. And you, Pontic Amastris, and to boxwood bearing
 Cytorus, the pinnace declares that this was and is most well-known to you; she
 says that from its origin it stood upon your topmost peak, dipped its oars in
 your waters, and bore its master from there through so many seas lacking
 self-control, whether the wind called from port or starboard or whether
 favorable Jove fell on both the sheets at once; and nor were any vows
 [from stress of storm] made be her to shore-gods, when she
 came from the most distant sea to this glassy lake. But these things were of
 before: now laid away, she grows old in peace and dedicates herself to you, twin
 Castor, and to Castor's twin."
"Let us live, my Lesbia, and let us love, and count all the rumors of stearn old
 men at a penny's fee. Suns can set and rise again: we when once our brief light
 has set must sleep through a perpetual night. Give me a thousand kisses, and
 then a hundred, then another thousand, then a second hundred, then another
 thousand without resting, then a hundred. Then, when we have made many
 thousands, we will confuse the count lest we know the numbering, so that no one
 can cast an evil eye on us through knowing the number of our kisses."
"Flavius, you would speak of your sweetheart to Catullus, and you could not keep
 silent, were she not both ill-mannered and ungraceful. In truth you affect I
 know not what hot-blooded whore you love: this you are ashamed to confess. For
 your couch, fragrant with garlands and Syrian unguent, in no way mute cries out
 that you do not lie alone at night, and also the pillow and bolsters indented
 here and there, and the creakings and joggings of the quivering bed: unless you
 can silence these, nothing and again nothing avails you to hide your affairs.
 And why? You would not display such love-weary loins unless occupied in some
 tomfoolery. Therefore, whatever you have for good or ill, tell us! I want to
 call you and your loves to heaven in charming verse."
"You ask, how many kisses of yours, Lesbia, may be enough and to spare for me. As
 the countless Libyan sands which strew asafoetida-bearing"
"between the oracle of sweltering Jove
 and the sacred tomb of ancient Battus, or as the many stars, when night is
 silent, look upon the furtive loves of mortals, to kiss you with kisses of so
 great a number is enough and to spare for passion-driven Catullus: so many that
 prying eyes may not avail to number, nor ill tongues to bewitch."
"Unhappy Catullus, cease your trifling and what you see lost, know to be lost.
 Once bright days used to shine on you when you used to go wherever your girl led
 you, loved by us as never a girl will ever be loved. There those many joys
 occured which you did wish, nor was the girl unwilling. In truth bright days
 used once to shine on you. Now she no longer wants you: you too, powerless to
 avail, must not want her, do not pursue her retreating, do not live unhappy, but
 with firm-set mind endure, harden yourself. Farewell, girl! now Catullus hardens
 himself, he will not seek you, will not ask you since you are unwilling. But you
 will be pained, when you are not asked. Faithless, go your way! what manner of
 life remains to you? who now will visit you? who find you beautiful? whom will
 you love now? whose will you be called? whom will you kiss? whose lips will you
 bite? But you, Catullus, remain firm in your hardness."
"Veranius, standing in the front of all my friends, had I three hundred thousand
 of them, have you come home to your Penates, your longing brothers and your aged
 mother? You have come back. O joyful news to me! I'll see you safe and sound,
 and hear you speak of regions, deeds, and peoples Iberian, as is your manner;
 and reclining over your neck shall kiss your laughing mouth and eyes. Of all men
 most full of bliss, who is more happy or more blissful than I?"
"Varus drew me off from the Forum where I was passing the time to see his lover: a
 professional, as it seemed to me at first sight, neither inelegant nor lacking
 good looks. When we came in, we fell to discussing various subjects, among
 which, how was"
"now, how things
 had gone there, and whether I had made any money there. I replied what was true,
 that neither ourselves nor the praetors nor their company had brought away
 anything whereby to flaunt a better-scented hair-do, especially as our praetor,
 who boned us all, didn't care a hair for his company. ""But surely,"" she said,
 ""you got some men to bear your litter, for they are said to grow there?"" I, to
 make myself appear to the girl as one of the fortunate, ""No,"" I say, ""it did not
 go that badly with me, ill as the province turned out, that I could not procure
 eight strapping men to bear me. (But not a single one was mine either here or
 there who could hoist on his neck the fractured foot of my old bedstead). And
 she, like the saucy tramp she was, ""Please, Catullus,"" says she, ""lend me those
 bearers for a short time, for I want to ride to the shrine of Serapis."" ""Hold
 it!"" say I to the girl, ""when I said I had this, my mind slipped; my friend,
 Cinna Gaius, he provided himself with these. In truth, whether his or
 mine—what is it to me? I use them as though I had paid for them. But
 you are awfully crude and a bother, not through you am I to be careless."""
Furius and Aurelius, comrades of Catullus, whether he forces his way to furthest
"where the shore is lashed by
 the far-echoing waves of the Dawn, or whether to the land of the Hyrcanians or
 soft Arabs, or whether to the land of the Sacians or quiver-bearing Parthians,
 or where the seven-mouthed"
"colors
 the sea, or whether he traverses the lofty"
", gazing at the monuments of mighty Caesar, the Gallic
 Rhine, the shuddering water and remotest Britons, prepared to attempt all these
 things at once, whatever the will of the heavenly gods may
 bear,—repeat to my girl a few words, though they are not at all good.
 May she live and flourish with her fornicators, and may she hold three hundred
 at once in her embrace, loving not one in truth, but bursting again and again
 the guts of all: nor may she look back upon my love as before, which by her
 lapse has fallen, just as a flower on the meadow's edge, after the touch of the
 passing plough."
"Marrucinius Asinius, you do not use your left hand nicely amid the jests and
 wine: you make off with the napkins of the careless. Do you think this is witty?
 It escapes you, fool, how coarse a thing and unbecoming it is! Don't you believe
 me? Believe your brother Pollio who would willingly give a talent to divert you
 from your thefts: for he is a lad skilled in pleasantries and clever talk.
 Therefore, either expect three hundred hendecasyllables, or return me my napkin
 which I esteem, not for its value but as a pledge of remembrance from my
 comrade. For Fabullus and Veranius sent me napkins as a gift from Iberian
 Saetabis; these I must love even as I do Veraniolus and Fabullus."
"You will feast well with me, my Fabullus, in a few days, if the gods favour you,
 provided you bring here with you a good and great feast, not forgetting a
 radiant girl and wine and wit and all kinds of laughter. Provided, I say, you
 bring them here, our charming friend, you will feast well: for your Catullus'
 purse is full with cobwebs. But in return you will receive a pure love, or what
 is sweeter or more elegant: for I will give you an unguent which the Venuses and
 Cupids gave to my girl, which, when you smell it, you will entreat the gods to
 make you, Fabullus, all Nose!"
"If I did not love you more than my eyes, most delightful Calvus, for your gift I
 should hate you with Vatinian hatred. For what have I done or what have I said
 that you should torment me so vilely with these poets? May the gods give that
 client of yours ills enough, who sent you so many scoundrels! Yet if, as I
 suspect, Sulla, the litterateur, gives you this new and care-picked gift, it is
 not ill to me, but well and beatific, that your labors [in his cause] are not
 made light of. Great gods, what a horrible and accursed book which—if
 you please!—you have sent to your Catullus, that he might die of
 boredom the livelong day in the Saturnalia, choicest of days! No, no, my joker,
 you will not get off so easily: for at dawn I will haste to the booksellers'
 cases; the Caesii, the Aquini, Suffenus, every poisonous rubbish will I collect
 that I may repay you with these tortures. Meantime farewell! be gone from here,
 where an ill foot brought you, pests of the period, most wretched of poets."
"I commend myself and my lover to you, Aurelius. I come with a modest request
 that,—if you longed for anything with your heart which you desired
 chaste and untouched—you will preserve my boy's chastity
 from—I do not say from the people: I fear not at all those who hurry
 along the thoroughfares here and there occupied on their own business: in truth,
 my fear is from you and your penis, pestilent to boys fair and to foul. Set it
 in motion where you please, as you please, as much as you want, outdoors
 wherever you find the opportunity: for this one object I make an exception, to
 my thought a reasonable request. But if your infatuation and senseless passion
 push you forward, scoundrel, to a crime so great as to assail our head with your
 snares, ah!, then an evil fate will make you suffer, when, with feet taut bound,
 radishes and mullets will pierce through the open hole."
"I will make you my boys and bone you, sexually submissive Aurelius and Furius the
 sodomite, who think, because my verses are voluptuous, that I am not chaste
 enough. For it is right that a poet be chaste himself; it is not at all
 necessary for his verses to be. My verses, in a word, may have a spice and
 charm, if they are voluptuous and not chaste enough, and because they are sexy
 and can arouse—I do not say boys—but this hairy pair who
 can't shake their stiffies. Because you have read of many thousand kisses, do
 you think me less a man? I will make you my boys and bone you!"
O
Colonia
", you who long to play on a
 long bridge and have it readied to dance on, but fear the shaky legs of the
 little bridge standing on second-hand sticks, lest it tumble flat in the deep
 swamp; let the bridge be as good as you desire, on which even the Salian dances
 may be undertaken: for which give to me,"
", the gift of greatest laughter. I want a certain
 townsman of mine to go head over heels from your bridge into the mud, in truth
 where the brimming, stinking swamp is darkest and an especially deep-sunk mire.
 He's the biggest ass of a man, lacking the sense of a two-year-old dozing in his
 father's cradling arm. Although a girl is wedded to him flushed with
 springtide's bloom (and a girl more dainty than a tender kid needs to be watched
 with keener diligence than the lush-black grape-bunch), he leaves her to play as
 she wants, cares not a single hair, nor troubles himself with marital office,
 but lies like an alder tree felled by a Ligurian hatchet in a ditch, as aware of
 everything as though no woman were anywhere. Such is my thick-headed friend! he
 sees not, he hears not. He also knows not who he is himself, or whether he is or
 is not. Now I want to chuck him head first from your bridge, if it is possible
 to suddenly rouse this sleepy dullard and to leave behind in the heavy mud his
 sluggish spirit, as does a mule its iron shoe in the sticky mire."
= Anth. Lat. 1700
= Anth. Lat. 1699
= Anth. Lat. 1698
"Aurelius, father of hunger, in ages past in time now present and in future years
 yet to come, you long to make my lover your boy. And you do not operate
 secretly: for you are with him, you joke together, closely sticking at his side
 you try every means. In vain: for, though you plot against me, I'll tag you
 first with a boning.— Now if you were satisfied, I would be silent:
 but what irks me is that my boy, ah me! must learn to starve and thirst with
 you. Therefore, desist, while you may with modesty, lest you reach the
 end,—but by being boned."
"That Suffenus, Varus, whom you know well, is a man fair spoken, witty and urbane,
 and one who makes lengthy verses. I think he has written at full length ten
 thousand or more, nor are they set down, as commonly, on scraped parchment:
 regal paper, new boards, new bosses, straps, red parchment, the whole thing
 ruled with the lead and smoothed off with the pumice. But when you read these,
 that refined and urbane Suffenus seems on the contrary to be a mere goatherd or
 ditch-digger, so great and shocking is the change. What can we think of this?
 The same man, who just now seemed a man-about-town, or if anything could be more
 polished than that, is stupider than the stupid countryside as soon as he
 touches poetry, and nor is the same man ever as happy as when he is writing
 poetry—so greatly is he pleased with himself, so much does he admire
 himself. Still, we are all the same and are deceived, nor is there any man in
 whom you can not see a Suffenus in some one point. Each of us has his assigned
 delusion: but we see not what's in the wallet on our back."
"Furius, you who have neither a slave, nor a coffer, nor a bug, nor a spider, nor
 fire, but have both a father and a step-mother whose teeth can munch up even
 flints,—you live finely with your father, and with your father's
 wooden spouse. And no wonder: for you are all in good health, finely you digest,
 you fear nothing, not arson, not the fall of your house, not impious thefts, not
 plots of poison, no perilous happenings whatsoever. And you have bodies drier
 than horn (or if there is anything more arid still, parched by sun, frost, and
 famine. So why is it not happy and well with you? Sweat is a stranger to you,
 absent also are saliva, phlegm, and evil nose-snot. Add to this cleanliness the
 thing that's still more cleanly, that your backside is purer than a salt-cellar,
 nor do you crap ten times in the whole year, and then it is harder than beans
 and pebbles; and if you rub and crumble it in your hands, you can't ever dirty a
 finger. Spurn not hese goodly gifts and favours, Furius, nor think lightly of
 them; and stop always begging for a hundred sesterces: for you are happy
 enough!"
"O you who are the little flower of Juventian race, not only of these now living,
 but of those that were before and also of those that will be in the coming
 years, I'd rather that you had given the wealth of Midas to that man who owns
 neither a slave nor coffer, than that you should suffer yourself to be loved by
 him. ""What?"" you ask. ""Isn't he a fine looking man?"" He is; but this fine
 looking man has neither a slave nor coffer. Slight and make light of this as you
 please: nevertheless, he has neither a slave nor coffer."
"Thallus you sodomite, softer than rabbit's fur, or goose's marrow, or an ear
 lobe, or an old man's drooping penis, and the cobwebs there; again Thallus
 greedier than the driving storm, when †the ram shows them off their
 guard†, give me back my mantle which you have swooped down upon, and
 the Saetaban napkin and Thynian tablets which, idiot, you openly parade as
 though they were heirlooms. Now unglue these from your nails and return them,
 lest the stinging scourge shamefully score your downy little butt and delicate
 little hands, and you unaccustomedly heave and toss like a tiny boat surprised
 on the vast sea by a raging storm."
"Furius, your little house is pitted not against the southern breeze nor the
 western wind nor cruel Boreas nor sunny east, but fifteen thousand two hundred
 sesterces. O horrible and baleful wind."
"Boy cupbearer of old Falernian, pour me more pungent cups as bids the laws of
 Postumia, mistress of the feast, drunker than a drunken grape. But off with you,
 as far as you please, crystal waters, bane of wine, depart you to the sober:
 here the Thyonian juice is pure."
"Piso's Company, a penniless staff, with lightweight knapsacks, scantly packed,
 most dear Veranius you, and my Fabullus too, how goes it with you? Have you
 borne frost and famine enough with that sot? Which in your tablets
 appear—the profits or expenses? So with me, who when I followed a
 praetor, inscribed more gifts than gains. ""0 Memmius, well and slowly did you
 bone me, supine, day by day, with the whole of that beam."" But, from what I see,
 in like case you have been; for you have been crammed with no smaller a poker.
 Courting friends of high rank! But may the gods and goddesses heap ill upon you
 disgraces to Romulus and Remus."
"Who can see this, who can stand it, save the shameless, the glutton, and gambler,
 that Mamurra Mentula should possess what long-haired"
had and remotest
"had before? You sodomite Romulus, will
 you see this and bear it? Then you are shameless, a glutton and a gambler. And
 will he now, proud and overflowing, saunter over each one's bed, like a little
 white dove or an Adonis? You sodomite Romulus, will you see this and bear it?
 Then you are shameless, a glutton and a gambler. For such a name, Generalissimo,
 have you been to the furthest island of the west, that this love-weary Mentula
 of yours should squander twenty or thirty million? What is it but a skewed
 liberality? Perhaps he spent too little, or perhaps he was washed clean? First
 he wasted his patrimony; second the loot from"
; then third the loot from
, which even the goldbearing
knows. Now he is feared by Gauls and
". Why do you indulge this scoundrel?
 What can he do but devour well-fattened inheritances? Was it for such a name,
 † most wealthy father-in-law and son-in-law, that you have destroyed
 everything?"
"Alfenus, unmindful and unfaithful to your comrades true, is there now no pity in
 you, hard of heart, for your sweet loving friend? Do you betray me now, and not
 hesitate to play me false now, dishonourable one? Yet the irreverent deeds of
 traitorous men do not please the dwellers in heaven: this you take no heed of,
 leaving me wretched among my ills. Tell me, ah, what may men do, or in whom may
 they have their trust? Surely you used to bid me entrust my soul to you, unfair,
 drawing my affections to yourself, as though all were safely mine. Yet now you
 withdraw yourself, and all your purposeless words and deeds you suffer the winds
 and airy clouds to bear away. If you have forgotten, yet the gods remember,
 Faith remembers, and in time to come will make you regret your doing."
"! Eyelet of islands and
 peninsulas, which each Neptune holds whether in limpid lakes or on the wide sea,
 how gladly and how happily do I see you again, scarcely believing that I've left
 behind Thynia and the Bithynian plains, and that I gaze on you safe and sound. O
 what greater blessing than cares released, when the mind casts down its burden,
 and when wearied with the toil of travel we reach our hearth, and rest in the
 long-for bed. This and only this repays our numerous labors. Hail, lovely"
", and rejoice in your master;
 and rejoice, you waves of the Lybian lake; laugh, you laughters echoing from my
 home."
"Please, my sweet Ipsithilla, my delight, my charmer: order me to come to you at
 noon. And if you should order this, it will be useful if no one makes fast the
 outer door [against me], and don't be minded to go out, but stay at home and
 prepare for us nine continuous love-makings. In truth if you are minded, give
 the order at once: for breakfast over, I lie supine and ripe, poking through
 both tunic and cloak."
"0 best of the thieves of the baths, Vibennius the father, and his sexually
 submissive son (for the father is the filthier with the right hand, the son is
 the greedier with the backside), why don't you go into exile and to hellish
 shores, seeing that the father's plunder is known to the people, and that, son,
 you cannot sell your hairy butt for one cent?"
"We, upright maids and youths, are in Diana's care: upright youths and maids, we
 sing Diana. 0 Latonia, progeny great of greatest Jove, whom your mother bore
 beneath Delian olive, that you might be queen of lofty mounts, of foliaged
 groves, of remote glens, and of winding streams. You are called Juno Lucina by
 the mother in the pangs of childbirth, you are named potent Trivia and"
Luna
"with an ill-got light. You,
 Goddess, with monthly march measuring the yearly course, glut with produce the
 rustic roofs of the farmer. Be you hallowed by whatever name you prefer; and
 cherish, with your good aid, as you are accustomed, the ancient race of
 Romulus."
"Paper, I would like you say to that sweet poet, my comrade, Caecilius, that he
 come to"
", quitting New Comum's
 city-walls and Larius' shore; for I want him to receive certain thoughts from a
 friend of his and mine. Therefore, if he is wise, he'll devour the way, although
 a bright-hued girl a thousand times calls him back when he goes, and flinging
 both arms around his neck asks him to delay—she who now, if truth is
 reported to me, is undone with immoderate love of him. For, since the time she
 read the beginning of his"
", flames have been
 devouring the innermost marrow of the poor little girl. I forgive you, girl,
 more learned than the Sapphic muse: for charmingly has the Great Mother been
 begun by Caecilius."
Volusius'
", defiled sheets, fulfil a vow for my girl: for
 she vowed to sacred Venus and to Cupid that if I were reunited to her, and I
 desisted hurling savage iambics, she would give the choicest writings of the
 worst poet to the slow-footed god to be burned with ill-omened wood. And the
 wretched girl saw herself vow this to the gods in jest. Now, O Creation of the
 pale blue sea, you who dwell in sacred"
and in storm-beaten
, and foster
and reedy
,
"and
 Golgos and"
", the tavern of
 the Adriatic, accept and acknowledge this vow if it lacks neither grace nor
 charm. But meantime, off with you to the flames, crammed with boorish speech and
 vapid,"
of Volusius, defiled sheets.
"Tavern of lust and you, its tentmates (at ninth pillar from the Cap-donned
 Brothers), do you think that you alone have mentules, that it is allowed to you
 alone to have sex with whatever may be feminine, and to think the rest are
 goats? But, because you sit, tasteless, hundred or maybe two hundred in a row,
 do you think I would not dare to bone you entire two hundred loungers at once!
 Just think it! for I'll scrawl dirty pictures all over the front of your tavern.
 For my girl, who has fled from my embrace, she whom I loved as none will be
 loved, for whom I fought fierce fights, has seated herself here. All of you,
 good men and rich, and also (0 cursed shame) all of you piddling back-alley
 fornicators, are making love to her; and you above all, Egnatius, one of the
 long-haired race, the son of Celtiberia full of rabbits, whose quality is
 stamped by dense-grown beard, and teeth scrubbed with Spanish urine."
"It is ill, Cornificius, with your Catullus, it is ill, by Hercules, and most
 unbearably; and greater, greater ill, each day and hour! And you, what solace do
 you give, even the tiniest, the lightest, by your words? I'm angry with you. Is
 my love worth this? Yet one little message would cheer me, though more full of
 sadness than the tears of Simonides."
"Egnatius, who has shiny, white teeth, grins forever everywhere. If he is in
 court, when counsel excites tears, he grins. If he be at funeral pyre where one
 mourns a son devoted, where a bereft mother's tears stream for her only son, he
 grins. Whatever it may be, wherever he is, whatever may happen, he grins. Such
 an ill habit has he—neither in good taste, I suppose, nor refined.
 Therefore take note from me, my good Egnatius. Whether you are from the city or"
"or Tiburtine, or a thrifty
 Umbrian or a fat Etruscan, or a dark, toothy Lanuvian, or Transpadine (to touch
 upon my own folk also), or whoever of those who cleanly wash their teeth, still
 I wish you wouldn't grin forever everywhere; for nothing is more senseless than
 senseless giggling. Now you're a Celtiberian: and in the Celtiberian land early
 in the morning they piss and scrub their teeth and pinky gums with it, so that
 the higher the polish on your teeth, the more it proclaims that you have drunk
 your piss."
"What ill-set mind, poor little Ravidus, thrusts you headlong at my iambics? What
 god, none advocate of good for you, stirs you to a senseless quarrel? That you
 may be in the people's mouth? What do you want? Do you want to be famous, no
 matter in what way? You will be, but by our long-drawn vengeance, since you
 wanted to love my lover."
"Ameana, a love-worn girl, asks me for a whole ten thousand, that girl with an
 ugly little nose, wench of the bankrupt Formian. You near of kin in whose care
 the girl is, summon both friends and doctors: for the girl is not sane, and is
 not accustomed to ask her mirror how she looks."
"O come, all ye hendecasyllables, as many as you are, from every part, all of you,
 as many soever as you be! A filthy whore thinks that I am a joke, and says she
 won't return to me your writing tablets, if you can stand it. Let's pursue her,
 and claim them back. ""Who is she?"" you ask. That one, whom you see strutting
 disgracefully, grinning with annoyance like a mime with a face like a Gallic
 puppy. Surround her, and claim them back. ""Filthy whore, give back the writing
 tablets; give back, filthy whore, the writing tablets."" You don't give two
 cents? You slime, you whorehouse, or if you could be anything even more
 loathsome! But you mustn't think that this is enough. For if nothing else we can
 extort a blush on your brazened bitch's face. We'll yell again in heightened
 voice, ""Filthy whore, give back the writing tablets; give back, filthy whore,
 the writing tablets."" But we do no good, she isn't moved. We must change our
 approach and our tune, if you can make further progress—""Chaste and
 honest, give back our writing tablets."""
"Hail, girl with nose not the smallest, and with foot not lovely, and with eyes
 not black, and with fingers not long, and with mouth not dry and with tongue not
 so very elegant, the wench of the bankrupt Formian. And the province declares
 you to be lovely? With you our Lesbia is to be compared? O generation witless
 and unmannerly!"
O, Homestead of ours, whether
"or
 Tiburtine (for people in whose heart it is not to wound Catullus declare you
 Tiburtine, but those in whose heart it is, will wager anything you're"
) but whether
"or more truly Tiburtine, I was glad to
 be within your rural country-home, and to cast off an ill cough from my chest,
 which—not unearned—my belly granted me, for grasping after
 luxurious meals. For, while I want to be Sestius' guest, I read his defence
 against the plaintiff Antius, crammed with venom and pestilence. Hence a chill
 heavy rheum and fitful cough shook me continually until I fled to your asylum,
 and brought me back to health with rest and nettle-broth. Therefore, refreshed,
 I give you utmost thanks, that you have not avenged my fault. Nor do I pray now
 for anything but that, if I should retake Sestius' abominable script, its chill
 may bring a cold and cough to Sestius himself; and he invites me [to dinner]
 whenever I read one of his bad books."
"Septimius, holding his lover Acme in his lap, says, ""My Acme, if I do not love
 you to death, and am not prepared to love you constantly all the years in time
 to come, as much and the most as one can who is desperately in love—
 alone in"
or in torrid
"may I come face to face with a grey-eyed
 lion."" When he said this, Love, leftwards as before, with approbation rightwards
 sneezed. Then Acme slightly bending back her head, and kissed the intoxicated
 eyes of her sweet boy with her rose-red lips. ""So,"" she said, ""my life,
 Septimillus, we shall serve this lord alone from now on, as greater, keener fire
 burns the more amid my soft marrow."" When she said this, Love, leftwards as
 before, with approbation rightwards sneezed. Now made complete under good
 auspices, with mutual minds they love and are loved. Poor little Septimius wants
 Acme alone more than [the wealth of] the"
or
": in
 Septimius alone the faithful Acme takes delight and pleasure. Whoever has seen
 happier people, whoever a more propitious Love?"
"Now spring brings back mild breezes without cold, now heaven's equinoctial fury
 falls silent at Zephyr's pleasant breezes. Let the Phrygian meadows be left
 behind, Catullus, and the teeming fields of sun-scorched"
: let us fly to the glorious cities of
". Now my palpitating soul longs
 to wander, now happy in their zeal my feet grow strong. O sweet band of
 comrades, fare you well, whom various roads in different directions carry back
 all at once setting out far from home."
"Porcius and Socration, the two left hands of Piso, scurf and hunger of the world,
 has that verpus Priapus placed you before my Veraniolus and Fabullus? Do you
 spend the day luxuriously in expensive feasts? Do my comrades seek out dinner
 invitations the cross-roads?"
"If someone let me kiss continually your honey-sweet eyes, Juventius, continually
 I'd kiss even to three hundred thousand kisses, nor ever should I seem on the
 verge of having enough, not even if the crop of our kisses should be thicker
 than dried wheat sheaves."
"Most eloquent of Romulus' descendancy—as many as there are, who have
 been, 0 Marcus Tullius, and who will be after in other years—to you
 Catullus gives his greatest gratitude, the worst poet of all by as much as you
 are the best advocate of all."
"Yesterday, Licinius, in leisure much we played upon my tablets, as became us, men
 of fancy. Each jotting verses in turn played first in this meter then in that,
 exchanging mutual epigrams amid jokes and wine. But I departed from there,
 afire, Licinius, with your wit and charm, so that food was useless to my
 wretched self; nor could sleep close my eyes in quiet, but all over the bed in
 restless fury did I toss, longing to behold daylight that I might speak with
 you, and again we might be together. But afterwards, when my limbs, weakened by
 my restless labours, lay stretched in semi-death upon the bed, I made this poem
 for you, my delight, from which you will perceive my pain. Now beware of
 presumptuousness, and beware of rejecting our pleadings, I pray you, apple of my
 eye, lest Nemesis exact her dues from you. She is a forceful Goddess; beware her
 wrath."
"He seems to me to be equal to a god, he, if such were lawful, to surpass the
 gods, who sitting across from you again and again gazes on you, and listens to
 you sweetly laughting, which snatchs away from sombre me my every sense: for the
 instant I glance on you, Lesbia, nothing is left to me [of voice], but my tongue
 is numbed, a keen-edged flame spreads through my limbs, with sound self-caused
 my twin ears sing, and my eyes are enwrapped with night. Leisure, Catullus, to
 you is hurtful: in leisure beyond measure do you exult and pass your life.
 Leisure first ruined rulers and prosperous cities."
"What is it, Catullus, why delay your death? Nonius the tumor is seated in the
 curule chair, Vatinius lies his way to the consulship: what is it, Catullus, why
 delay your death?"
"I just had to laugh at someone in the crowded court who, when with admirable art
 my Calvus had set forth Vatinius' crimes, with hands uplifted in admiration thus
 spoke: ""Great Gods, the fluent little Salaputian!"""
"Otho's tiny little head is ... the master's uncouth half-soaped legs, Libo's
 light and delicate wind ... if not all things I wish would displease you and
 Fuficius, that warmed-over old man ... again you will be enraged at my
 undeserving iambics, Generalissimo."
"We beg, if maybe it's not too much trouble, you'll show us where your haunt may
 be. We looked for you in the smaller Campus, for you in the Circus, for you in
 every bookshop, for you in"
Jupiter
"s
 holy temple. My friend, on Magnus' promenade I grabbed every girl I saw whose
 looks were unruffled, and at the same time I demanded loudly, ""Give me back
 Camerius, you wretched girls."" One of them, drawing back her naked ... ""Look!
 he's hiding here between my rosey-red nipples!"" But bearing with you is a labor
 of"
"now. Do you deny that you
 bear yourself in such great arrogance, my friend? Tell us where you will be,
 declare it boldly, give up the secret, trust it to the light. What, do the
 milk-white maidens detain you? If you hold your tongue closed up in your mouth,
 you squander Love's every fruit: for"
"joys in words and talk. Yet if you wish, you may bar your
 palate, as long as you are a partner of true love."
O thing ridiculous,
Cato
", and funny, and
 worthy of your ears and of your laughter. Laugh,"
", the more you love Catullus: the thing is ridiculous and
 too funny. Just now I caught a boy a-thrusting in a girl: and, so please you,
 Dione, for lack of a weapon I slayed him with my own rigidity."
"Beautifully it fits the shameless sodomites, Mamurra and sexually submissive
 Caesar. It's no wonder: they share like stains—the one from the City,
 the other, Formian—which stay deep-marked and they can not be washed
 off. Debauched twins each, both learned, both in one bed, one not more than the
 other the greater greedier adulterer, allied rivals of the girls. Beautifully it
 fits the shameless sodomites."
0 Caelius, our
Lesbia
, that
", the self-same Lesbia whom Catullus
 loved more than himself and all his own, now at the cross-roads and in the
 alleyways husks off the high-spirited descendants of"
.
Rufa of
"blows Rufulus, she the
 wife of Menenius. Often you have seen her among the tombs, snatching her meal
 from the funeral pyre. When she chases after the bread which has rolled from the
 fire, she is buffeted by the half-shaven cremator."
"Did a lioness of the Libyan mountains beget you, or Scylla yelping from her
 lowmost groin with mind so harsh and loathsome, that you have contempt for a
 suppliant's voice in his last calamity? ah, heart overgreatly cruel."
"You who dwell on Helicon Hill, sprung from Urania, who carry off the gentle
 virgin to her mate, O Hymenaeus Hymen, O Hymen Hymenaeus!"
"Over the vast main borne by swift-sailing ship, Attis, as with hasty hurried foot
 he reached the Phrygian wood and gained the tree-girt gloomy sanctuary of the
 Goddess, there roused by rabid rage and mind astray, with sharp-edged flint
 downwards dashed his burden of virility. Then as he felt his limbs were left
 without their manhood, and the fresh-spilt blood staining the soil, with
 bloodless hand she hastily took a tambour light to hold, your taborine, Cybele,
 your initiate rite, and with feeble fingers beating the hollowed bullock's back,
 she rose up quivering thus to chant to her companions."
Pines once sprung from
"s peak
 floated, it is said, through liquid billows of"
to the flowing
"and the Aeetaean territory, when the picked youth, the
 vigour of"
"manhood seeking to
 carry away the Golden Fleece from"
", dared to skim over salt seas in a swift-sailing ship,
 sweeping the blue-green ocean with paddles shaped from fir-wood. That goddess
 who guards the castles in topmost parts of the towns herself fashioned the car,
 scudding with lightest of winds, uniting the interweaved pines unto the curving
 keel. That goddess first instructed untaught Amphitrite with sailing. Scarce had
 it split with its stem the windy waves, and the billow vexed with oars had
 whitened into foam, when arose from the swirl of the hoary eddies the faces of
 sea-dwelling Nereids wondering at the marvel. And then on that propitious day
 mortal eyes gazed on sea-nymphs with naked bodies bare to the breasts
 outstanding from the foamy swirl. Then it is said Peleus burned with desire for
 Thetis, then Thetis despised not mortal marriage, then Thetis' sire himself
 sanctioned her joining to Peleus. O heroes, born in the time of joyfuller ages,
 hail! sprung from the gods, good progeny of mothers, hail! and may you be
 favourably inclined. I'll address you often in my song, you too I'll approach,
 Peleus, pillar of"
", so
 increased in importance by your fortunate wedding-torches, to whom"
"himself, the sire of the gods himself,
 yielded up his beloved. Did not Thetis embrace you, she most winsome of Nereids
 born? Did not Tethys consent that you should lead home her grandchild, and
 Oceanus too, whose waters enfold the total globe? When in full course of time
 the longed-for day had dawned, all"
"assembled and thronged his home, a gladsome company
 overspreading the halls: they bear gifts to the fore, and their joy in their
 faces they show. Scyros remains a desert, they leave Phthiotic Tempe, Crannon's
 homes, and the fortressed walls of Larissa; at Pharsalia they gather, beneath
 Pharsalian roofs they throng. None tills the soil, the heifers' necks grow
 softened, the trailing vine is not cleansed by the curved rake-prongs, nor does
 the bull tear up the clods with the prone-bending plowblade, nor does the sickle
 prune the shade of the spreading tree-branches, squalid rust steals over the
 neglected plows."
"Though outspent with care and unceasing grief, I am withdrawn, Ortalus, from the
 learned Virgins, nor is my soul's mind able to bring forth the sweet fruit of
 the Muses (so much does it waver amidst ills: for but lately the wave of the
 Lethean stream washes with its flow the poor, pale foot of my brother, whom the
 land of"
"crushes beneath the
 Rhoetean shore, stolen from our eyes. [Never again will I hear you
 speak,] never again, O brother, more lovable than life, will I see you.
 But surely I will always love you, always will I sing elegies made gloomy by
 your death, such as the Daulian bird pipes beneath densest shades of foliage,
 lamenting the lot of slain Itys.—Yet amidst sorrows so deep, O
 Ortalus, I send you these verses recast from Battiades, lest by chance you
 should think that your words have slipped from my mind, entrusted to the
 wandering winds, as it was with that apple, sent as furtive love-token by the
 wooer, which leapt out from the virgin's chaste bosom; for the hapless girl
 forgot she had placed it beneath her soft robe—when she starts at her
 mother's approach, out it is shaken: and down it rolls headlong to the ground,
 while a tell-tale flush bears witness to the girl's distress."
"He who scanned all the lights of the great firmament, who ascertained the rising
 and the setting of the stars, how the flaming splendour of the swift sun was
 darkened, how the planets disappear at certain seasons, how sweet love with
 stealth detaining Trivia beneath the Latmian crags draws her away from her airy
 circuit: he that same Conon saw me, a lock of hair from"
Berenice
"s head, in the celestial light,
 gleaming brightly, which she outstretching graceful arms promised to all of the
 gods, when the king, magnified by his recent marriage, had gone to lay waste the
 Assyrian borders, bearing the sweet traces of nightly contests, in which he had
 borne away her virginal spoils. Is"
"abhorred by new brides? And are the parents' joys turned
 aside by feigned tears, which they shed copiously within the threshold of the
 bedchamber? Their groans are untrue, by the gods I swear! This my queen taught
 me by her many lamentings, when her bridegroom set out for stern warfare. Yet,
 when deserted, you did not grieve the widowed couch, did you, but the tearful
 separation from a dear brother? How care consumed your marrow, sad deep within!
 Such that, your whole bosom being agitated, and your senses being snatched from
 you, your mind wandered! But in truth I have known you great of heart ever since
 you were a little maiden. Have you forgotten that noble deed, by which you
 gained a royal marriage, than which none dared other deeds bolder? Yet what
 grieving words you spoke when bidding your bridegroom farewell!"
"! how often with sad hand [you
 wiped] your eyes! What mighty god changed you? Was it that lovers are
 unwilling to be long absent from their dear one's body? Then did you promise me
 to the whole of the gods on your sweet consort's behalf, not without blood of
 oxen, if he should be granted safe return. In no long time he added captive"
"to the Egyptian territory. For
 these reasons I, bestowed amidst the celestial host, by a new gift fulfil your
 ancient vow. Unwillingly, O queen, did I quit your brow, unwillingly: I swear to
 you and to your head; if anyone swears lightly, may he bear a suitable penalty:
 but who may claim himself equal to steel? Even that mountain was swept away, the
 greatest on earth, over which Thia's illustrious progeny passed, when the Medes
 created a new sea, and the barbarian youth sailed its fleet through the middle
 of"
". What can locks of hair do,
 when such things yield to iron?"
"! may the whole race of the Chalybes perish, and whoever
 first began to seek the veins beneath the earth and invent the hardness of iron!
 Just before severance my sister locks were mourning my fate, when Ethiop
 Memnon's brother, the winged steed, beating the air with fluttering wings,
 appeared before Locrian Arsinoe, and he bearing me up, flies through aethereal
 shadows and lays me in the chaste bosom of"
". Zephyritis herself had dispatched him as her servant, a
 Greek settler on the Canopian shores. For it was the wish of many gods that the
 golden crown from Ariadne's temples stay fixed, not alone in heaven's light, but
 that we also should gleam, the spoils dedicated from your golden-yellow head;
 when moist with weeping I entered the temples of the gods, the goddess placed
 me, a new star, among the ancient ones. For touching the Virgin's and the cruel
 Lion's gleams, hard by Lycaonian Callisto, I turn westwards, a guide before the
 slow-moving Bootes who barely sinks into the vast ocean. But although the
 footsteps of the gods press upon me in the night, and the daytime restores me to
 the white-haired Tethys, (grant me your grace to speak thus, O Rhamnusian
 virgin, for I will not hide the truth through any fear, even if the stars revile
 me with ill words, yet I will unfold the pent-up feelings from truthful breast)
 I am not so much rejoiced at these things as I am tortured by being forever
 parted, parted from my lady's head, with whom I, in all ointments having not a
 share, drank many thousands when she was still a virgin."
"Because you, oppressed by fortune and bitter calamity, sent me this letter
 written with tears, that I might bear up shipwrecked you tossed by the foaming
 waves of the sea, and restore you from the threshold of death; you whom neither
 sacred Venus suffers to repose in soft slumber, desolate on a lonely couch, nor
 do the Muses divert with the sweet song of ancient poets, while your anxious
 mind keeps watch:—I am grateful that you call me your friend, and seek
 here the gifts of the Muses and of Venus. But so that my troubles may not be
 unknown to you, Manlius, and so that you not think that I hate the duty of host,
 hear how I myself am engulfed in the waves of fortune, and do not further seek
 joyful gifts from a wretched one. In that time when the white toga was first
 handed to me, and my flowering age was passing its delightful spring, much and
 enough did I sport: nor was the goddess unknown to us who mixes bitter-sweet
 with our cares. But my brother's death plunged all this pursuit into mourning. O
 brother, taken from my unhappy self; you by your dying have broken my ease, O
 brother; all our house is buried with you; with you have perished the whole of
 our joys, which your sweet love nourished in your lifetime. With your loss, I
 have dismissed wholly from mind these studies and every delight of mind. So
 then, because you write, “it is shameful for Catullus to be at"
", because here someone of the
 better sort warms up his frigid limbs on a desolate couch;“ that,
 Manlius, is not shameful; rather it is a sorrow. Therefore, forgive me if I do
 not bestow on you these gifts which grief has snatched from me, because I am
 unable. For the fact that there is no great store of writings with me arises
 from this, that we live at"
": there
 is my home, there is my hall, there my time is passed; here but one of my
 book-cases follows me. As it is thus, I would not want you to think that we do
 this from ill-will or with a mind not open enough, because ample store is not
 forthcoming to either of your desires: of my own accord would I grant both, had
 I the wherewithal."
"Don't wonder why no woman, Rufus, wants to place her tender thigh beneath you,
 not even if you tempt her with the gift of a rare robe or with the delights of a
 crystal-clear gem. A certain ill tale injures you, that you bear housed in the
 valley of your armpits a grim goat. This everyone fears. It's no wonder: for it
 is an exceeding ill beast, with whom no fair girl will sleep. Therefore, either
 murder that cruel plague of their noses, or cease to marvel, ""Why do they
 fly?"""
No one, says my lady, would she rather wed than myself, not even if
Jupiter
"himself sought her. Thus she says! but
 what a woman says to a desirous lover ought fitly to be written on the breezes
 and in running waters."
"If ever anyone was deservedly cursed with an atrocious goat-stench from armpits,
 or if limping gout did justly gnaw one, it is your rival, who occupies himself
 with your love, and who wondrously has obtained each these ills from you. For as
 often as he takes his pleasure, he just as often takes vengeance on both;
 herself he prostrates by his stink, he is slain by his gout."
Once you used to say you knew only Catullus,
Lesbia
", that you would not hold Jove before me. I loved you
 then, not only as a fellow his mistress, but as a father loves his own sons and
 sons-in-law. Now I do know you: so if I burn at greater cost, you are
 nevertheless to me far viler and of lighter thought. How can this be? you ask.
 Because such wrongs drive a lover to love the more, but less to respect."
"Cease to wish you well deserve anything from anyone, or to think anyone can
 become pious. All things are unpleasant, it is of no avail to have done deeds of
 kindness, but rather it wearies me, wearies me and proves the greater ill: so
 with me, whom no one oppresses more heavily nor more bitterly than he who a
 little while ago held me his one and only friend."
"Gellius had heard that his uncle used to scold anyone who spoke of or practised
 the delights of love. That this should not happen to him, he kneaded deeply his
 uncle's wife herself, and turned his uncle into a Harpocrates. He did whatever
 he wanted; for now, even if he boned his uncle, the uncle wouldn't say a
 word."
Now is my mind brought down to this point, my
Lesbia
", by your fault, and has so lost itself by its devotion,
 that now it cannot wish you well, were you to become most perfect, nor can it
 cease to love you, whatever you do."
"If there is any pleasure in a man's recalling the good deeds of the past, when he
 knows that he is pious and has not violated any sacred trust or abused the
 divinity of the gods to deceive men in any pact, great store of joys awaits you
 during your length of years, Catullus, from this thankless love of yours. For
 whatever people can say or do well for someone, such have been your sayings and
 your doings, and all your confidences have been squandered on a thankless mind.
 So then why do you torture yourself further? Why don't you strengthen your
 resolve and lead yourself out of this and, since the gods are unwilling, stop
 being miserable? It is difficult suddenly to set aside a love of long standing;
 it is difficult, this is true, no matter how you do it. This is your one
 salvation, this you must fight to the finish; you must do it, whether it is
 possible or impossible. O gods, if it is in you to have pity, or if ever you
 brought help to men in death's very extremity, look on pitiful me, and if I have
 lived my life with purity, snatch from me this canker and pest! Ah! like a
 numbness creeping through my inmost veins it has cast out every happiness from
 my breast. Now I no longer pray that she may love me in return, or (what is not
 possible) that she should become chaste: I wish but for health and to cast aside
 this foul disease. O gods, grant me this in return for my piety."
Rufus
", believed by me a friend, in vain
 and worthlessly, (in vain? yes, and in fact at an ill and grievous price) you
 have thus stolen upon me, and burning my innards, ah! snatched from wretched me
 all our good? you have snatched it, alas, you cruel venom of our life! alas, you
 plague of our friendship."
"Gallus has brothers, one of whom has a most charming spouse, the other a charming
 son. Gallus is a nice man: for he joins together their sweet loves, so that the
 nice girl beds with the the nice boy. Gallus is a foolish man not to see that he
 is himself a husband who as an uncle shows how to cuckold an uncle."
Lesbius is handsome: why not so? whom
Lesbia
"prefers to you, Catullus, and to your whole family. Yet
 this handsome one can sell Catullus and his family if he can find three
 acquaintances he can gain greet with a kiss."
"What shall I say, Gellius, how those rosy-red lips have become whiter than winter
 snow, when you leave home in the morning and when the eighth hour stirs you from
 a gentle nap amid the long day? Something is certain: perhaps Rumor whispers
 true that you are devouring the well-grown tenseness of a man's middle? So for
 certain it must be! the ruptured guts of poor little Victor and your lips marked
 with what was lately-drained cry it aloud."
"Could no one in this great people, Juventius, be a nice man you could fall in
 love with except for this guest of yours, paler than a gilded statue, from the
 dying town of"
"? He who now has
 your heart, whom you dare to place before us; and you know not what crime you
 commit."
"Quintius, if you want Catullus to owe you his eyes, or another thing dearer than
 his eyes, if such there is, do not snatch from him what is much dearer to him
 than his eyes, or what is dearer than his eyes."
Lesbia
"in her husband's presence says
 the utmost ill about me: this gives the fool the greatest pleasure. Mule, you
 perceive nothing! If she had forgotten about us and were silent, she would be
 all right: now becasuse she snarls and scolds, not only does she remember, but,
 what is far more to the point, she is angry. That is, she is enflamed and is
 speaking."
"Chommodious Arrius would say, whenever he wanted to say commodious, and for
 insidious hinsidious, and then hoped that he had spoken with accent wondrous
 fine, when aspirating hinsidious to the full of his lungs. I believe that his
 mother, his free uncle, his maternal grandfather and grandmother all spoke thus.
 When he was sent to"
", everyone's
 ears were rested, hearing these words spoken smoothly and slightly, nor after
 that did folk fear such words from him, when suddenly is brought the horrible
 news that th' Ionian waves, after Arrius had come there, no longer are Ionian,
 but are now the Hionian Hocean."
"I hate and I love. Why I do this, perhaps you ask. I know not, but I feel it
 happening and I am tortured."
"Quintia is lovely to many; to me she is radiant, tall, and straight. Each of
 these qualities I grant, but deny the whole of these is loveliness: for there is
 no charm, not a grain of salt in so great a body."
Lesbia
"is lovely, for not only is the whole of her most
 beautiful, but she has stolen all the Venus-charm from everybody together."
No woman can say truly that she has been loved as much as you,
Lesbia
", have been loved by me: no trust in any
 pact has ever been found so great as was that on my part in the love of you."
"What is he doing, Gellius, who has an itch with mother and sister and stays up
 all night with tunics cast aside? What is he doing, who does not allow his uncle
 to be a husband? Do you know the weight of crime he undertakes? He undertakes, O
 Gellius, so much as neither furthest Tethys nor Oceanus, father of nymphs, can
 cleanse: for there is no crime which can go further, not even if with lowered
 head he swallowed himself."
"Gellius is thin: why not? He who lives with so good a mother, so healthy and so
 beauteous a sister, and who has such a good uncle, and a worldfull of girl
 cousins, why would he cease to be skinny? who if he touched nothing but what is
 not lawful to touch—you will find ample reason why he is skinny."
"Let there be born a Magus from the unspeakable coupling of Gellius and his
 mother, and let him learn the Persian art of divination. For if"
"s impious religion is true, a pleasing
 Magus ought to be begotten from a mother and son, so that, when the chant has
 been learned, he may worship gods while melting the fat innards in the sacred
 flame."
"For no other reason, Gellius, did I hope for your faith to me in this our
 unhappy, this our desperate love, not because I knew you well or thought you
 constant or able to restrain your mind from a shameless act), but because I saw
 this girl whose love kept knawing at me was neither your mother nor your sister.
 And although I have had many mutual dealings with you, I did not believe this
 case to be enough cause for you. You considered it enough: so great is your joy
 in every kind of wrongdoing in which there is some vice."
"Lesbia forever speaks ill of me nor is ever silent about me: I'll be damned if
 Lesbia doesn't love me! By what sign? because mine are just the same: I
 exsecrate her constantly, yet may I be damned if I do not love her in sober
 truth."
"I am not over anxious, Caesar, to please you greatly, or to know whether you are
 a white or a black man."
"Mentula fornicates. Of course a mentule fornicates! This is what they
 say—the pot itself gathers the vegetables."
My Cinna's
"finally, after the ninth harvest it was begun,
 and after the ninth winter it was published, when Hortensius meanwhile five
 hundred thousand [lines] in one [year] ..."
"will be sent to the curving waves of innermost Satrachus,
 hoary ages will roll out"
long hence. But Volusius'
will die at
"itself, and will often furnish loose wrappings for
 mackerel. May the short works of my comrade remain in my heart; as for the
 people, let them rejoice in bloated Antimachus."
"Calvus, if anything pleasing or welcome from our grief can have an effect on
 silent graves, then with its longing we renew old loves and weep friendships
 once lost, surely Quintilia does not mourn her premature death as much as she
 rejoices in your love."
"So may the Gods love me, I did not think it made any difference whether I smelled
 Aemilius' mouth or his arse. In no respect is the latter cleaner, the former
 filthier; as a matter of fact, his backside is cleaner and better—for
 it comes without teeth. His mouth has teeth a foot and a half long, gums truly
 like an old wagon-box, and besides, he usually has a maw like the split twat of
 a she-mule pissing in the summer heat. This man has sex with many girls, and
 makes himself out to be charming, and is not condemned to the mill [to
 drive] the mule? Any girl who would touch him we would think could lick
 the arse of a diseased hangman."
"What can be said to you, if to anyone, stinking Victius, is said to wind bags and
 fools. For with that tongue, if the occasion should arise, you could lick arses
 and farmers' boots. If you want to destroy us altogether, Victius, yawn: you
 will accomplish what you want altogether."
"I stole from you, while you were playing, honeyed Juventius, a kiss sweeter than
 sweet ambrosia. But I bore it off not unpunished; for more than an hour I
 remember I was nailed to the top of a cross, while I purged myself [for
 my crime] to you, nor could any tears in the least remove your cruelty.
 For as soon as it was done, you washed your lips with many drops, and wiped them
 off with every finger, lest anything contracted from our mouth remain, as though
 it were the filthy spittle of a piss-wet whore. Besides, you have handed
 wretched me over to spiteful Love, nor have you ceased to torture me in every
 way, so that for me that kiss is now changed from ambrosia to be harsher than
 harsh hellebore. Since you award such punishment to wretched lover, never more
 after this will I steal kisses."
"Caelius and Quintius, the flower of the Veronese youth, madly in love with
 Aufilenus, madly in love with Aufilena—the one with the brother; the
 other with the sister. This is, as one would say, true brotherhood and sweet
 friendship. To whom shall I incline the more? Caelius, to you; for your single
 devotion to us was shown by its deeds, when the raging flame scorched my marrow.
 Be happy, Caelius, be potent in love."
"Through many nations and through many seas borne, I come, brother, for these sad
 funeral rites, that I may give the last gifts to the dead, and may vainly speak
 to your silent ashes, since fortune has taken yourself away from me. Ah, poor
 brother, undeservedly snatched from me. But now receive these gifts, which have
 been handed down in the ancient manner of ancestors, the sad gifts to the grave,
 drenched with a brother's tears, and for ever, brother, hail and farewell."
"If anything was entrusted in a pledge of silence by a friend whose inmost loyalty
 of spirit is known, you will find that I am one of those rightfully devoted,
 Cornelius, and think that I have become a Harpocrates."
"Come, Silo, either return me my ten thousand sesterces, and then be to your
 content surly and boorish: or, if you like the money, please stop being a
 pimp—and being surly and boorish."
"Do you believe that I could curse my life, she who is dearer to me than are both
 my eyes? I could not, nor if I could, would my love be so desperate: but you and"
"make a monstrosity out of
 everything."
"Mentula tries to climb Mount Pimpla: the Muses with their forks chuck him
 headlong down."
"When you see an auctioneer with a comely lad, what do believe other than that he
 longs to sell himself?"
"If ever something happens that you long for and want and is unhoped for, this is
 genuinely pleasing to the soul. And thus is it pleasing to us and far dearer
 than gold, that you have returned, Lesbia, to longing me, you have returned to
 me, longing and without hope, you brought yourself back to us. O day of whiter
 note! Who lives more happily than I alone, or who can name things greater to be
 wished for in this life?"
"If, Cominius, by the judgment of the people your white hair made filthy by
 unclean practices should perish, to be sure I do not doubt that first your
 tongue, hostile to goodness, cut out, will be given to the greedy vulture, the
 crow will gorge your eyes, gouged out, down his black throat, the dogs will
 gorge down your entrails, the wolves your remaining members."
"My life, you declare to me that this love of ours will be an everlasting joy
 between us. Great Gods! grant that she may promise truly, and say this in
 sincerity and from her soul, and that through all our lives we may be allowed to
 prolong together this bond of holy friendship."
"Aufilena, good professional girls are always praised: they receive their pay for
 what they intend to do. Because you promised me—which was a
 lie—you are unprofessional; because you do not give and often bring
 [home the pay], you do wrong. Either to do it is honest, or
 not to have promised was chaste, Aufilena: but to steal what was given by
 deceiving, proves you worse than the greedy whore who prostitutes herself with
 her whole body."
"Aufilena, that a bride live content in her husband alone is praise of exceptional
 praise: but it is preferable to lie beneath any lover you choose, rather than as
 mother to bring forth brothers [cousins] out of your
 uncle."
He is a lot of man,
Naso
", and he who
 descends with you is not a lot of man:"
you are a lot—and sexually submissive.
"In the first consulate of Pompey, Cinna, two used to frequent Mucilla: now again
 made consul, the two remain, but to each one has accrued a thousand. The seed of
 adultery is fruitful."
With his estate not falsely is Mentula of
"said to be rich, which has everything in it of such
 excellence, game preserves of every kind, fish, meadows, plowland and beasts. In
 vain: the yield is overcome by the expense. Therefore I grant that he is rich,
 while everything is lacking. Let us praise the estate, while its owner is a
 needy man."
"Mentula has something like thirty acres of meadow land, forty under cultivation:
 the rest are as the sea. Why can he not surpass Croesus in wealth, he who in one
 estate possesses so much? Meadow, arable land, immense woods, and open fields
 and marshes, even to the uttermost north and to the Ocean sea! All things great
 are here, yet is the owner most great beyond all; not a man, but in truth a
 mentule mighty, menacing!"
"Often seeking, my mind hunting how I could send to studious you the poems of
 Battiades, whereby I might soften you towards us, and you might not try to send
 hostile weapons at my head all the time—I see now that this effort was
 undertaken by me in vain, Gellius, and that our prayers to this end were of no
 avail. Your weapons against us we will ward off with our cloak; but, transfixed
 with ours, you will pay the punishment."
